<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
 <fileDesc>
 <titleStmt>
 <title>The North American Indian</title>
 <author>Edward S. Curtis</author>
 </titleStmt>
 <editionStmt>
  <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
 </editionStmt>
 <publicationStmt>
 <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
 <date value="2006-10-3">October 3, 2006</date>
 <idno type="etext-no">19449</idno>
 <availability>
 <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
 with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
 away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
 License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
 </availability>
 </publicationStmt>

 <sourceDesc>
  <bibl>
  <title>The North American Indian</title>
  <author>Edward S. Curtis</author>
  <imprint>
   <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
   <pubPlace>London</pubPlace>
   <publisher>Johnson Reprint Corporation</publisher>
   <date>1907</date>
  </imprint>
  </bibl>
 </sourceDesc>
 </fileDesc>

 <encodingDesc>
 <classDecl>
  <taxonomy id="lc">
  <bibl>
   <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
  </bibl>
  </taxonomy>
 </classDecl>
 </encodingDesc>
 <profileDesc>
 <langUsage>
  <language id="en">English</language>
 </langUsage>
 <textClass>
  <classCode scheme="lc">
  *** <!-- LoC Class (PR, PQ, ...) -->
  </classCode>
  <keywords>
  <list>
   <!-- <item></item> any keywords for PG search engine -->
  </list>
  </keywords>
 </textClass>
 </profileDesc>
 <revisionDesc>
 <change>
  <date value="2006-10">October 2006</date>
  <respStmt>
  <name>Joshua Hutchinson<lb /></name>
  <name>Suzanne Shell<lb /></name>
  <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
  </respStmt>
  <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
 </change>
 </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htbp' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w20             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w20             { width: 20% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text>
<front>
<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<figure url="images/image01.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Pool - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: The Pool - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>
<p></p>
</div>

<titlePage rend="page-break-before: right">
 <docTitle><titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: x-large">The North American Indian</titlePart><lb /><lb />
  <titlePart type="sub">Being A Series Of Volumes Picturing And Describing<lb />
  The Indians Of The United States And Alaska<lb /><lb /></titlePart></docTitle>
 <byline rend="text-align: center"><lb />Written, Illustrated, And Published By <docAuthor>Edward S. Curtis</docAuthor><lb /><lb />
  Edited By Frederick Webb Hodge<lb /><lb />
  Foreword By Theodore Roosevelt<lb /><lb />
  Field Research Conducted Under The Patronage Of J. Pierpont Morgan<lb /><lb />

  In Twenty Volumes This, The First Volume, Published In The Year Nineteen Hundred And Seven<lb /><lb />
</byline>

<docImprint>JOHNSON REPRINT CORPORATION<lb />
111 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003<lb /><lb />
JOHNSON REPRINT COMPANY LTD.<lb />
Berkeley Square House, London, W1X6BA</docImprint>
</titlePage>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<p rend="text-align: center">Copyright 1907, by Edward S. Curtis</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Landmarks in Anthropology</hi>, a series of reprints in cultural anthropology<lb />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">General Editor:</hi> Weston La Barre</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">First reprinting 1970, Johnson Reprint Corporation</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>Contents</head>
<divGen type="toc" />
</div>

<div>
<head>ALPHABET USED IN RECORDING INDIAN TERMS</head>

<p>[The consonants are as in English, except when otherwise noted]</p>

<table>
<row>
<cell>a</cell><cell>as in father</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ă</cell><cell>as in cat</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>â</cell><cell>as <hi rend="font-style: italic">aw</hi> in awl</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ai</cell><cell>as in aisle</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>e</cell><cell>as <hi rend="font-style: italic">ey</hi> in they</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ĕ</cell><cell>as in net</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>i</cell><cell>as in machine</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ĭ</cell><cell>as in sit</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>o</cell><cell>as in old</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ŏ</cell><cell>as in not</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ô</cell><cell>as <hi rend="font-style: italic">ow</hi>in how</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>oi</cell><cell>as in oil</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>u</cell><cell>as in ruin</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ŭ</cell><cell>as in nut</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ü</cell><cell>as in German hütte</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ụ</cell><cell>as in push</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>h</cell><cell>always aspirated</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>q</cell><cell>as <hi rend="font-style: italic">qu</hi> in quick</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>th</cell><cell>as in thaw</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>w</cell><cell>as in wild</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>y</cell><cell>as in year</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ch</cell><cell>as in church</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>sh</cell><cell>as in shall, sash</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>nasal, as in French dans</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>zh</cell><cell>as <hi rend="font-style: italic">z</hi> in azure</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>'</cell><cell>a pause</cell>
</row>
</table>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>Illustrations</head>
<divGen type="fig" />
</div>

<div>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Photogravures by John Andrew &amp; Son, Boston.</hi></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<figure url="images/image02.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nayé̆nĕzganĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Nayé̆nĕzganĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>
<p></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="xi" /><anchor id="Pgxi" />
<head>FOREWORD</head>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">In Mr. Curtis we have both an artist and a trained observer,
whose pictures are pictures, not merely photographs; whose work has
far more than mere accuracy, because it is truthful. All serious
students are to be congratulated because he is putting his work in
permanent form; for our generation offers the last chance for doing
what Mr. Curtis has done. The Indian as he has hitherto been is on
the point of passing away. His life has been lived under conditions
thru which our own race past so many ages ago that not a vestige of
their memory remains. It would be a veritable calamity if a vivid
and truthful record of these conditions were not kept. No one man
alone could preserve such a record in complete form. Others have
worked in the past, and are working in the present, to preserve parts
of the record; but Mr. Curtis, because of the singular combination of
qualities with which he has been blest, and because of his extraordinary
success in making and using his opportunities, has been able to do what
no other man ever has done; what, as far as we can see, no other man
could do. He is an artist who works out of doors and not in the closet.
He is a close observer, whose qualities of mind and body fit him to make
his observations out in the field, surrounded by the wild life he commemorates.
He has lived on intimate terms with many different tribes
of the mountains and the plains. He knows them as they hunt, as
they travel, as they go about their various avocations on the march
and in the camp. He knows their medicine men and sorcerers, their chiefs
and warriors, their young men and maidens. He has not only seen
their vigorous outward existence, but has caught glimpses, such as few
white men ever catch, into that strange spiritual and mental life of
theirs; from whose innermost recesses all white men are forever barred.
Mr. Curtis in publishing this book is rendering a real and great
service; a service not only to our own people, but to the world of
scholarship everywhere.</hi></p>

<p>THEODORE ROOSEVELT</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">October 1st, 1906.</hi></p>

<figure url="images/image03a.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Illustration: Theodore Roosevelt</figDesc>
</figure>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="xii" /><anchor id="Pgxii" />
<figure url="images/image03.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>White River - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: White River - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>
<p></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="xiii" /><anchor id="Pgxiii" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>GENERAL INTRODUCTION</head>

<p>The task of recording the descriptive material embodied
in these volumes, and of preparing the photographs which
accompany them, had its inception in 1898. Since that
time, during each year, months of arduous labor have been spent
in accumulating the data necessary to form a comprehensive and
permanent record of all the important tribes of the United States
and Alaska that still retain to a considerable degree their primitive
customs and traditions. The value of such a work, in great
measure, will lie in the breadth of its treatment, in its wealth of
illustration, and in the fact that it represents the result of personal
study of a people who are rapidly losing the traces of their aboriginal
character and who are destined ultimately to become assimilated
with the "superior race."</p>

<p>It has been the aim to picture all features of the Indian life
and environment—types of the young and the old, with their
habitations, industries, ceremonies, games, and everyday customs.
Rather than being designed for mere embellishment, the photographs
are each an illustration of an Indian character or of some
vital phase in his existence. Yet the fact that the Indian and his
surroundings lend themselves to artistic treatment has not been
lost sight of, for in his country one may treat limitless subjects
of an æsthetic character without in any way doing injustice to
scientific accuracy or neglecting the homelier phases of aboriginal
life. Indeed, in a work of this sort, to overlook those marvellous
touches that Nature has given to the Indian country, and for the
origin of which the native ever has a wonder-tale to relate, would
be to neglect a most important chapter in the story of an environment
that made the Indian much of what he is. Therefore, being
directly from Nature, the accompanying pictures show what actually
exists or has recently existed (for many of the subjects have<pb n="xiv" /><anchor id="Pgxiv" />
already passed forever), not what the artist in his studio may presume
the Indian and his surroundings to be.</p>

<p>The task has not been an easy one, for although lightened at
times by the readiness of the Indians to impart their knowledge,
it more often required days and weeks of patient endeavor before
my assistants and I succeeded in overcoming the deep-rooted
superstition, conservatism, and secretiveness so characteristic of
primitive people, who are ever loath to afford a glimpse of their
inner life to those who are not of their own. Once the confidence
of the Indians gained, the way led gradually through the
difficulties, but long and serious study was necessary before knowledge
of the esoteric rites and ceremonies could be gleaned.</p>

<p>At times the undertaking was made congenial by our surroundings
in beautiful mountain wild, in the depths of primeval forest,
in the refreshing shade of cañon wall, or in the homes and sacred
places of the Indians themselves; while at others the broiling
desert sun, the sand-storm, the flood, the biting blast of winter,
lent anything but pleasure to the task.</p>

<p>The word-story of this primitive life, like the pictures, must
be drawn direct from Nature. Nature tells the story, and in
Nature's simple words I can but place it before the reader. In
great measure it must be written as these lines are—while I am
in close touch with the Indian life.</p>

<p>At the moment I am seated by a beautiful brook that bounds
through the forests of Apacheland. Numberless birds are singing
their songs of life and love. Within my reach lies a tree, felled
only last night by a beaver, which even now darts out into the
light, scans his surroundings, and scampers back. A covey of
mourning doves fly to the water's edge, slake their thirst in their
dainty way, and flutter off. By the brookside path now and then
wander prattling children; a youth and a maiden hand in hand
wend their way along the cool stream's brink. The words of
the children and the lovers are unknown to me, but the story of
childhood and love needs no interpreter.</p>

<figure url="images/image04.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>By The Sycamore - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: By The Sycamore - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>It is thus near to Nature that much of the life of the Indian
still is; hence its story, rather than being replete with statistics of<pb n="xv" /><anchor id="Pgxv" />
commercial conquests, is a record of the Indian's relations with
and his dependence on the phenomena of the universe—the
trees and shrubs, the sun and stars, the lightning and rain,—for
these to him are animate creatures. Even more than that, they
are deified, therefore are revered and propitiated, since upon them
man must depend for his well-being. To the workaday man of
our own race the life of the Indian is just as incomprehensible as
are the complexities of civilization to the mind of the untutored
savage.</p>

<p>While primarily a photographer, I do not see or think photographically;
hence the story of Indian life will not be told in
microscopic detail, but rather will be presented as a broad and
luminous picture. And I hope that while our extended observations
among these brown people have given no shallow insight
into their life and thought, neither the pictures nor the descriptive
matter will be found lacking in popular interest.</p>

<p>Though the treatment accorded the Indians by those who lay
claim to civilization and Christianity has in many cases been
worse than criminal, a rehearsal of these wrongs does not properly
find a place here. Whenever it may be necessary to refer to some
of the unfortunate relations that have existed between the Indians
and the white race, it will be done in that unbiased manner
becoming the student of history. As a body politic recognizing
no individual ownership of lands, each Indian tribe naturally
resented encroachment by another race, and found it impossible
to relinquish without a struggle that which belonged to their
people from time immemorial. On the other hand, the white
man whose very own may have been killed or captured by a
party of hostiles forced to the warpath by the machinations of
some unscrupulous Government employé, can see nothing that is
good in the Indian. There are thus two sides to the story, and in
these volumes such questions must be treated with impartiality.</p>

<p>Nor is it our purpose to theorize on the origin of the Indians—a
problem that has already resulted in the writing of a small
library, and still with no satisfactory solution. The object of the
work is to record by word and picture what the Indian is, not<pb n="xvi" /><anchor id="Pgxvi" />
whence he came. Even with this in view the years of a single
life are insufficient for the task of treating in minute detail all the
intricacies of the social structure and the arts and beliefs of many
tribes. Nevertheless, by reaching beneath the surface through a
study of his creation myths, his legends and folklore, more than
a fair impression of the mode of thought of the Indian can be
gained. In each instance all such material has been gathered by
the writer and his assistants from the Indians direct, and confirmed,
so far as is possible, through repetition by other members of
their tribe.</p>

<p>Ever since the days of Columbus the assertion has been made
repeatedly that the Indian has no religion and no code of ethics,
chiefly for the reason that in his primitive state he recognizes no
supreme God. Yet the fact remains that no people have a more
elaborate religious system than our aborigines, and none are more
devout in the performance of the duties connected therewith.
There is scarcely an act in the Indian's life that does not involve
some ceremonial performance or is not in itself a religious act,
sometimes so complicated that much time and study are required
to grasp even a part of its real meaning, for his myriad deities
must all be propitiated lest some dire disaster befall him.</p>

<p>Likewise with their arts, which casual observers have sometimes
denied the Indians; yet, to note a single example, the
so-called "Digger" Indians, who have been characterized as in
most respects the lowest type of all our tribes, are makers of delicately
woven baskets, embellished with symbolic designs and so
beautiful in form as to be works of art in themselves.</p>

<p>The great changes in practically every phase of the Indian's
life that have taken place, especially within recent years, have
been such that had the time for collecting much of the material,
both descriptive and illustrative, herein recorded, been delayed, it
would have been lost forever. The passing of every old man or
woman means the passing of some tradition, some knowledge of
sacred rites possessed by no other; consequently the information
that is to be gathered, for the benefit of future generations, respecting
the mode of life of one of the great races of mankind, must be<pb n="xvii" /><anchor id="Pgxvii" />
collected at once or the opportunity will be lost for all time. It
is this need that has inspired the present task.</p>

<figure url="images/image05.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Fire Drill - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: The Fire Drill - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>In treating the various tribes it has been deemed advisable that
a geographic rather than an ethnologic grouping be presented, but
without losing sight of tribal relationships, however remote the
cognate tribes may be one from another. To simplify the study
and to afford ready reference to the salient points respecting the
several tribes, a summary of the information pertaining to each is
given in the appendices.</p>

<p>In the spelling of the native terms throughout the text, as
well as in the brief vocabularies appended to each volume, the
simplest form possible, consistent with approximate accuracy, has
been adopted. No attempt has been made to differentiate sounds
so much alike that the average student fails to discern the distinction,
for the words, where recorded, are designed for the general
reader rather than the philologist, and it has been the endeavor
to encourage their pronunciation rather than to make them
repellent by inverted and other arbitrary characters.</p>

<p>I take this opportunity to express my deep appreciation to
those who have so generously lent encouragement during these
years of my labor, from the humblest dwellers in frontier cabins
to the captains of industry in our great commercial centres, and
from the representatives of the most modest institutions of learning
to those whose fame is worldwide. Without this encouragement
the work could not have been accomplished. When the
last opportunity for study of the living tribes shall have passed
with the Indians themselves, and the day cannot be far off, my
generous friends may then feel that they have aided in a work
the results of which, let it be hoped, will grow more valuable as
time goes on.</p>

<p>EDWARD S. CURTIS.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<figure url="images/image06.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>A Noonday Halt - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: A Noonday Halt - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>
<p></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="xix" /><anchor id="Pgxix" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME ONE</head>

<p>While it is the plan of this work to treat the tribes in
the order of their geographic distribution, rather than
to group them in accordance with their relationship
one to another, we are fortunate, in the present volume, to have
for treatment two important southwestern Indian groups—the
Navaho and the Apache—which are not only connected linguistically
but have been more or less in proximity ever since they
have been known to history.</p>

<p>Because of his cunning, his fearlessness, and his long resistance
to subjection both by the missionary and by the governments
under whose dominion he has lived, but until recent times never
recognized, the Apache, in name at least, has become one of the
best known of our tribal groups. But, ever the scourge of the
peaceable Indians that dwelt in adjacent territory, and for about
three hundred years a menace to the brave colonists that dared
settle within striking distance of him, the Apache of Arizona
and New Mexico occupied a region that long remained a <hi rend="font-style: italic">terra
incognita</hi>, while the inner life of its occupants was a closed book.</p>

<p>There is little wonder, then, that we have known practically
nothing of the Apache and their customs beyond the meagre
record of what has been given us by a few army officers; consequently
their study was entered into with especial interest.
Although much time was expended and much patience consumed
before the confidence of their elders was gained, the work was
finally successful, as will be seen particularly by the creation
legend and the accompanying mythologic picture-writing on
deerskin, which give an insight into the mode of thought of this
people and a comprehensive idea of the belief respecting their
genesis. Not satisfied with the story as first related by the
medicine-men lest error perchance should have crept in, it was<pb n="xx" /><anchor id="Pgxx" />
repeated and verified by others until no doubt of its entire accuracy
remained. It is especially fortunate that the chief investigations
were made in the summer of 1906, when the new "messiah
craze" was at its height, thus affording exceptional opportunity
for observing an interesting wave of religious ecstasy sweep over
this primitive folk.</p>

<p>The Navaho tribe, second only to the Sioux in numbers, have
been the least affected by civilizing influences. The Navaho is
the American Bedouin, the chief human touch in the great
plateau-desert region of our Southwest, acknowledging no superior,
paying allegiance to no king in name of chief, a keeper
of flocks and herds who asks nothing of the Government but to
be unmolested in his pastoral life and in the religion of his forebears.
Although the mythology and ceremonials of this virile
people would alone furnish material for many volumes, it is
believed that even with the present comparatively brief treatment
a comprehensive view of their character and activities will be
gained.</p>

<p>It is with pleasure that I acknowledge the able assistance rendered
by Mr. W. W. Phillips and Mr. W. E. Myers during the
last two years of field work in collecting and arranging the
material for this volume, and the aid of Mr. A. F. Muhr in
connection with the photographic work in the laboratory.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">EDWARD S. CURTIS</p>
</div>
</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<figure url="images/image07.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Apache Camp</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Apache Camp</figDesc>
</figure>
<p></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<figure url="images/image08.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Typical Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Typical Apache</figDesc>
</figure>
<p></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="003" /><anchor id="Pg003" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE APACHE</head>
<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>HISTORICAL SKETCH</head>

<p>The Indian and his history present innumerable problems
to the student. Facts seemingly contradict facts, well-founded
theories contradict other theories as well founded.
Linguistically the Apache belong to the great Athapascan family,
which, according to the consensus of opinion, had its origin in
the far North, where many tribes of the family still live. Based
on the creation legends of the Navaho and on known historical
events, the advent of the southern branch of this linguistic group—the
Navaho and the Apache tribes—has been fixed in the
general region in which they now have their home, at about the
time of the discovery of America. Contrary to this conclusion,
however, the legend of their genesis gives no hint of an origin
in other than their historical habitat. The history and the
legendary lore of the Indian are passed down from generation to
generation, so that it would seem hardly credible that all trace of
this migration from a distant region should have become lost
within a period of somewhat more than four hundred years.</p>

<p>Again, judging by the similarity in language, the Apache and
the Navaho in prehistoric times were as nearly a single group as
the present bands of Apache are; and, likewise, there is sufficient
similarity in the underlying principles of their mythology to
argue a common tribal origin. The names as well as the functions
of several of the mythic characters are identical in both
tribes, as, for example, the war gods Nayé̆nĕzganĭ and Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ.
These miracle-performing twins in each case are the
sons of a woman (who occupies an almost identical position in
both Navaho and Apache mythology) and the sun and water respectively.
Pollen also is deified by each—as Hádĭntĭn Boy among
the Apache and Tádĭtĭn Boy among the Navaho. If, therefore,
we may concede that the Navaho and the Apache were originally<pb n="004" /><anchor id="Pg004" />
one tribe, as their language certainly indicates, we have many
arguments in favor of the theory of long residence in the South-west
of this branch of the Athapascan family, for the striking
differences in the details of their myths would seem to indicate
that the tribal separation was not a recent one, and that the
mythology of the two tribes became changed in the course of its
natural development along different lines or through accretion of
other peoples since the original segregation. The Apache story of
their creation portrays human beings in their present form, while
in the Navaho genesis myth occurs the remarkable story, unquestionably
aboriginal, of the evolution of the lower animals through
successive underworlds until the present world is reached, then as
spirit people miraculously creating human life.</p>

<p>The beautiful genesis myth of the Apache is complete; it
does not reflect an incipient primitive culture, but one developed
by age. The mythology and ceremonial of the Navaho exhibit
unquestioned signs of being composite in origin. Their ceremonials
are perhaps the most elaborate of any Indians except the
Pueblos; indeed the very life of this people so teems with ceremony
as almost to pass comprehension. The Navaho ritual probably
reached its highest phase about the beginning of the nineteenth
century. It would seem impossible for a religion so highly developed
as this to have attained such a stage within a comparatively
short time.</p>

<p>Before the early years of the seventeenth century the Spanish
chroniclers give us nothing definite regarding the Apache of what
is now Arizona and New Mexico, but there are numerous accounts
of their aggressiveness from this time onward.</p>

<figure url="images/image09.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ténokai</hi> - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ténokai</hi> - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Father Francisco Garcés, who in 1775-76 journeyed from his
mission of San Xavier del Bac, in southern Arizona, to San Gabriel,
California, thence to the Hopi country, and back to his mission
by way of the Colorado and the Gila rivers, had sufficient knowledge
of the Apache to keep well out of their country, for they
had ever been enemies of Garcés' peaceful neophytes, the Papago
and the Pima. To the warlike, marauding Apache Garcés gave
much thought, drawing up a plan for holding them in subjection<pb n="005" /><anchor id="Pg005" />
by the establishment of a cordon of presidios. To read his simple
plan and compare the ineffectual efforts of the Americans, who
had the Apache country virtually surrounded by military posts for
many years, will convince one that while Garcés held the Apache
in justifiable fear, he little knew the true character of those with
whom he was reckoning.</p>

<p>So far as diligent field research reveals, there was but one tribe
or band of Indians living within proximity of the Apache Indians
of Arizona in early times who ever affiliated with them, or associated
with them in any way save on terms of enmity. This tribe
was the Apache-Mohave, of Yuman stock, whose domain extended
along the Rio Verde in central Arizona, immediately adjacent to
the territory over which the Apache proper held undisputed sway.
With these, affiliation practically became fusion, for in outward
semblance, characteristics, mode of living, and handicraft they
are typically Apache; but their mother tongue, though impaired,
and remnants of their native mythology are still adhered to.
Through the Apache-Mohave, allied with the Apache since
early times, and resembling them so closely as to have almost
escaped segregation until recent years, did the tribe now so widely
known as Apache undoubtedly receive its name.</p>

<p>The Apache-Mohave call themselves <hi rend="font-style: italic">Apátĭĕh</hi>, which means,
simply, "people." The Walapai, another Yuman tribe farther
north, whose dialect resembles that of the Apache-Mohave more
closely than do the dialects of the Mohave and the Yuma, also call
themselves <hi rend="font-style: italic">Apátĭĕh</hi>. Although the pronunciation of this word is
indicated more nearly correctly by this spelling than by "Apache,"
only a trained ear can distinguish the difference in sound when
the average Yuman Indian utters it. Etymologically it comes from
<hi rend="font-style: italic">apá</hi>, "man," and the plural suffix -<hi rend="font-style: italic">tĭĕh</hi>.</p>

<p>The mountain fastness of the Apache in Arizona permitted
easiest approach from the south and the west for all who wished
to seek peace or revenge. The Apache-Mohave, living as Apache
in close affiliation, were on the western border of this stronghold,
whence they made raids upon several other Yuman groups, north,
west, and south, in company with the Apache. They were also<pb n="006" /><anchor id="Pg006" />
the first to be attacked by enemies waging offensive warfare, hence
any name by which they designated themselves might readily
have been transmitted to the whole Apache group. Early Spanish
missionaries alluded to the Apache-Mohave as true Apache.
Contradistinguished from the Apache proper, the Apache-Mohave
are called Yavapai and Yavapĕh by their congeners of the Colorado
river, a term that has been employed by early writers, misled
through the close association of the Apache-Mohave with the
Apache, to designate also the latter people. It is further evident
that the term Apache came to be applied to this great division
of the Athapascan family indirectly, as its component tribes are
not known by that name in any of the Indian languages of the
Southwest, and there is no evidence of its being of other than
Indian origin.</p>

<figure url="images/image10.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>At The Ford - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: At The Ford - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Since known to history, the many bands of Apache have
occupied the mountains and plains of southern Arizona and New
Mexico, northern Sonora and Chihuahua, and western Texas—an
area greater than that of the states of New York, Pennsylvania,
New Jersey, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont, Maine, Ohio,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and West Virginia. They were
always known as "wild" Indians, and indeed their early warfare
with all neighboring tribes, as well as their recent persistent
hostility toward our Government, which precipitated a "war of
extermination," bear out the appropriateness of the designation.
An admission of fear of anything is hard to elicit from the weakest
of Indian tribes, but all who lived within raiding distance of the
Apache, save the Navaho, their Athapascan cousins, freely admit
that for generations before their subjugation the Apache were
constantly held in mortal terror.</p>

<p>Through the constant depredations carried on against the
Mexican settlements in northern Sonora and Chihuahua, under
the leadership of Juan José, an Apache chief educated among the
Mexicans, those two states were led, in 1837, to offer a bounty
for Apache scalps. The horror of this policy lay in the fact that
the scalp of a friendly Indian brought the same reward as that of
the fiercest warrior, and worse still, no exception was made of<pb n="007" /><anchor id="Pg007" />
women or children. Nothing could have been more effective
than this scalp bounty in arousing all the savagery in these
untamed denizens of the mountains, and both Mexico and the
United States paid dearly in lives for every Apache scalp taken
under this barbarous system. Predatory warfare continued unabated
during the next forty years in spite of all the Mexican government
could do. With the consummation of the treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo, in 1848, the Apache problem became one to be solved
by the United States as well.</p>

<p>In 1864, under General James H. Carleton, the "war of
extermination" was begun in a most systematic manner. On
April 20 this officer communicated a proposal of co-operation to
Don Ignacio Pesqueira, Governor of Sonora, saying: "If your
excellency will put a few hundred men into the field on the first
day of next June, and keep them in hot pursuit of the Apaches of
Sonora, say for sixty or ninety days, we will either exterminate
the Indians or so diminish their numbers that they will cease
their murdering and robbing propensities and live at peace."</p>

<p>This request was met. The settlers in Arizona, under agreement,
placed a force in the field provisioned with army supplies.
Several hundred Pima, Papago, and Maricopa Indians also were
supplied with guns, ammunition, and clothing, and pressed into
service; but a year's effort netted the combined forces little
gain. Although two hundred Apache were killed and many
head of stolen stock recovered, practically no advance toward the
termination of hostilities was accomplished.</p>

<p>In April, 1865, Inspector-General Davis arranged a conference
at the Copper Mines in New Mexico with Victorio, Nané,
Acosta, and other chiefs, among whom were Pasquin, Cassari, and
Salvador, sons of Mangas Coloradas, through which he learned
of the existence of dire destitution among the Apache and a
desire for peace on condition that they be permitted to occupy
their native haunts. But the Government had adopted a policy
of removal by which the Arizona Apache desiring peace should
join the Mescaleros at the Bosque Redondo in New Mexico.
To this they flatly refused to agree, and the warfare continued.</p>

<pb n="008" /><anchor id="Pg008" />

<figure url="images/image11.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Bathing Pool - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: The Bathing Pool - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Practically all the Apache were assembled in Arizona in 1865,
and waged hostilities with renewed energy for the next five years,
being joined by the Walapai in 1868. The close of this period
found the situation quite as unsettled as ever.</p>

<p>On June 4, 1871, General George Crook was placed in command.
Crook was not an exterminator. In the fall of the same
year he said:</p>

<p>"I think that the Apache is painted in darker colors than he
deserves, and that his villainies arise more from a misconception
of facts than from his being worse than other Indians. Living
in a country the natural products of which will not support him,
he has either to cultivate the soil or steal, and as our vacillating
policy satisfies him we are afraid of him, he chooses the latter,
also as requiring less labor and being more congenial to his
natural instincts. I am satisfied that a sharp, active campaign
against him would not only make him one of the best Indians
in the country, but it would also save millions of dollars to the
Treasury, and the lives of many innocent whites and Indians."</p>

<p>Crook's policy was one of peace, but he made it plain to the
Indians that if they did not agree to peace when liberal terms
were offered, they could expect a campaign against them hitherto
unequalled in vigor. It was thus that by 1873 the Tontos,
Coyoteros, and Apache-Mohave were subdued and the backbone
of Apache resistance broken.</p>

<p>The Apache-Mohave and the Tontos were placed on a reservation
on the Rio Verde; the Coyoteros were taken to the White
Mountain district near Fort Apache; the Pinaleños and parts of
other bands surrendered and were established at San Carlos; in
all, approximately three thousand Apache had been brought under
control. About one thousand hostiles yet remained in the mountains,
but by 1874 they had become so nearly subjugated as to
make it seem advisable to transfer the Arizona reservations from
the War Department to the Office of Indian Affairs, which
was done. The policy of the Indian Office from the beginning
had been to concentrate the various bands upon one reservation
at San Carlos. Disaffection arose between different bands<pb n="009" /><anchor id="Pg009" />
until this became a despicable place to nearly all, while continued
adherence to the removal policy drove the Chiricahua
from their southern Arizona reservation to seek refuge with the
Ojo Caliente Apache in southwestern New Mexico, in 1876,
although they had been living in comparative peace for four
years. In 1877 these Chiricahua and the Ojo Caliente band
were forcibly removed to San Carlos, but while en route Victorio
and a party of forty warriors made their escape. In September
of the same year three hundred more fled from San Carlos and
settler after settler was murdered. In February, 1878, Victorio
and his notorious band surrendered at Ojo Caliente, but gave
notice that they would die fighting before submitting to removal
to San Carlos. The major portion of the three hundred Chiricahua
who had left San Carlos surrendered at Fort Wingate, New
Mexico, shortly before. All these were taken to the Mescalero
reservation in New Mexico.</p>

<p>Haunted by the dread of removal to San Carlos, the appearance
of a party of Grant County officials at the Mescalero agency
on a hunting tour a few months later caused Victorio and his
band to flee with a number of Chiricahua and Mescaleros to
the mountains of southern New Mexico.</p>

<p>For two years, until he met his death at the hands of Mexican
troops in the fall of 1880, Victorio spread carnage throughout
the southern portions of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, and
the northern states of Mexico, enlisting the aid of every willing
renegade or refugee of whatever band or tribe in that section.
After him Nané, Chato, Juh, Geronimo, and other doughty
hostiles carried the fighting and raiding along until June, 1883,
when Crook, reassigned to the Arizona district, followed the
Chiricahua band under Geronimo into the Sierra Madre in
Chihuahua, whence he brought them back whipped and ready to
accept offers of peace. The captives were placed upon the San
Carlos and White Mountain reservations, where, with the various
other Apache bands under military surveillance, and with Crook
in control, they took up agriculture with alacrity. But in 1885
Crook's authority was curtailed, and through some cause, never<pb n="010" /><anchor id="Pg010" />
quite clear, Geronimo with many Chiricahua followers again
took the warpath. Crook being relieved at his own request,
Gen. Nelson A. Miles was assigned the task of finally subduing
the Apache, which was consummated by the recapture of
Geronimo and his band in the Sierra Madre in September, 1886.
These hostiles were taken as prisoners to Florida, later to Alabama,
and thence to Fort Sill, Oklahoma, where, numbering 298,
they still are, living as farmers in peace and quiet, but still under
the control of the military authorities.</p>

<figure url="images/image12.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Alchĭsé</hi> - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Alchĭsé</hi> - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>One of the last hostile movements of note was the so-called
Cibicu fight in 1882. In the spring of that year an old medicine-man,
Nabakéltĭ, Attacking The Enemy, better known as Doklínĭ,
started a "medicine" craze in the valley of the Cibicu on the White
Mountain reservation. He had already a considerable following,
and now claimed divine revelation and dictated forms of procedure
in bringing the dead to life. As medicine paraphernalia he made
sixty large wheels of wood, painted symbolically, and twelve sacred
sticks, one of which, in the form of a cross, he designated "chief
of sticks." Then with sixty men he commenced his dance.</p>

<p>One morning at dawn Nabakéltĭ went to the grave of a man
who had been prominent in the tribe and who had recently died.
He and his adherents danced about the grave and then dug up
the bones, around which they danced four times in a circle. The
dancing occupied the entire morning, and early in the afternoon
they went to another grave, where the performance was repeated.
In each instance the bones were left exposed; but later four men,
specially delegated, went to the graves and erected a brush hut
over the remains.</p>

<p>Nabakéltĭ told the people that they must pray each morning
for four days, at the end of which time the bleached bones would
be found clothed with flesh and alive again. By the end of
the second day the Apache band on the Cibicu became excited
almost to the degree of frenzy. They watched the little grave-houses
constantly and gathered in groups about other graves.</p>

<p>Some of the Apache employed as scouts with the detachment
stationed at Fort Apache heard of the craze and obtained<pb n="011" /><anchor id="Pg011" />
leave of absence to investigate. They returned and informed the
commanding officer, then acting as agent, that their people were
going mad, whereupon a number of scouts and troopers were sent
to learn the cause of the trouble and to ask Nabakéltĭ to come to
the fort for an interview. Though angered by the message, the
old man agreed to come in two days. Meanwhile he had the
little brush houses over the bones tightly sealed to keep out
preying animals and curious Indians. He then explained to his
people that, owing to the interruption by the whites, it was
probable that the bones would not come to life at the end of four
days, as predicted, but that he would make a new dance later and
prove the efficacy of his creed.</p>

<p>Then he started for the fort with his entire band of dancers,
sixty-two in number, each with his "sacred medicine"—wheels,
sticks, and drums. They journeyed afoot, stopping occasionally
to dance, and reached the grounds of the fort late in the afternoon
of the second day. On they passed, dancing in a spectacular
manner, and camped that night on the flat a little above the fort,
where they waited for someone to come over to interview them.
The agent did not send for Nabakéltĭ that night, so at daybreak
he started up White river with his band, passing by the present
agency site, and crossing into Bear Springs valley. Thence they
took the trail toward the Cibicu again, reaching the Carrizo in
the evening, where they camped for the night and performed
another dance. The following morning they took the trail for
their home, which they reached rather early in the day.</p>

<p>As soon as the band had reached its destination, another summons
was delivered to Nabakéltĭ to appear before the agent at the
fort. This time the old man sent back word that he would not
come: he had gone once, and if any had wished to see him,
they had had their chance.</p>

<p>On receipt of this reply, sixty mounted soldiers, armed and
provisioned, were sent over to the Cibicu to put a stop to the
dancing. Apache scouts had been stationed to watch the manœuvres
of the Indians and to keep the officials informed. They met
the troopers, who made a night ride to the stream, and informed<pb n="012" /><anchor id="Pg012" />
them where the old medicine-man was encamped. Early in the
morning the soldiers reached the Cibicu at a point about two
miles above Nabakéltĭ's camp, whence a detachment was despatched
to arrest the medicine-man and bring him to the place
where headquarters were being established. It was the intention
merely to arrest and hold him while the troops rested for the
day, preparatory to taking him back to the fort; but it was
deemed necessary to send a force sufficiently large to cope with
the Indians should they attempt resistance.</p>

<figure url="images/image13.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Mescal Hills - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Mescal Hills - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Nabakéltĭ yielded without hesitation to the demands of the soldiers,
and forthwith rode up to headquarters. Everything seemed
very quiet. There was no demonstration against the soldiers, who
stacked their arms and unloaded the pack-trains. The mules were
hobbled and turned loose, and the cavalry horses tethered and fed.</p>

<p>While this apparently peaceful condition prevailed, a brother
of the medicine-man, angered because of the arrest, dashed
into camp on a pony and shot and killed the captain in command.
Instantly, hardly realizing whence the shot had come,
one of the troopers struck Nabakéltĭ on the head with a cudgel,
killing him. Assured that a fight was imminent, the soldiers
receded to higher ground, a short distance back, where they
hurriedly made preparations for defence.</p>

<p>On learning that Nabakéltĭ had been killed, and deeming the
soldiers wholly to blame, a small party of Apache attacked the
troopers while retreating to the higher ground. Six of the soldiers
were killed, the mules stampeded, and the provisions burned, all
within a short space of time. The hostiles made their escape,
practically all of them leaving the valley.</p>

<p>The Government probably never lost money faster in an Indian
campaign than it did as a result of its interference with Nabakéltĭ's
harmless medicine craze. Had he been left alone his inevitable
failure, already at hand, to bring the dead to life would have
lost him his following, and in all probability his ill-success would
have cost his life at the hands of one of his tribesmen. As it
was, the hostilities that followed extended over several months,
costing many lives and a vast sum of money.</p>
</div>

<div>
<pb n="013" /><anchor id="Pg013" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>HOMELAND AND LIFE</head>

<p>The present Apache population is approximately six thousand,
including the Jicarillas and Mescaleros of New Mexico.
It is doubtful if the number ever exceeded ten thousand.
In population, therefore, the Apache seem almost too insignificant
to have kept the other tribes of the vast Southwest,
as well as two civilized nations, in constant dread for so long
a period.</p>

<p>At the present time the greater part of the Apache reside on
the White Mountain reservation, Arizona, comprising more than
3,500,000 acres, with agency headquarters at Whiteriver and
San Carlos. This reservation is a part of the great tableland of
southeastern Arizona, being a succession of mountains and high,
park-like mesas, broken here and there with valleys and watered
by limpid streams. The highlands are wooded with pine, cedar,
fir, juniper, oak, and other trees, while in the valleys are mistletoe-laden
cottonwood as well as willow, alder, and walnut, which, with
smaller growths, are interwoven with vines of grape, hop, and
columbine, in places forming a veritable jungle. On every hand,
whether on mountain or in valley, many varieties of cactus grow
in profusion; and in springtime cañon and vale, mountain-side
and mesa, are all aglow with wild flowers.</p>

<p>In midsummer the temperature of the lower reaches seems
as great as that of a furnace. At the same season in the mountain
and high mesa country, especially in the shade of the beautiful
forests, the atmosphere is ideal; but in winter these higher levels
are covered deep with snow, swept by fierce winds that chill one
to the very marrow.</p>

<p>The typical Apache habitation, called <hi rend="font-style: italic">kówa</hi>, consists of a
framework of poles loosely thatched with native grass, through
which the smoke from the central fire finds its outlet and the
rain and snow sift in, rendering it anything but a comfortable
shelter in time of storm. The <hi rend="font-style: italic">kówa</hi> is erected by the women,
who are little more than drudges, and as an Apache may have<pb n="014" /><anchor id="Pg014" />
as many wives as he feels able to support, he may have as
many homes as circumstances require. The various wives are
prone to be quarrelsome among themselves, for which reason a
man usually maintains one wife on one part of the reservation
and another wife perhaps many miles away.</p>

<figure url="images/image14.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Primitive Apache Home</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Primitive Apache Home</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>In the good old days the radius of Apache wandering centred
in the mountains of what is now southeastern Arizona; this was
their stronghold, their lair, whence they raided to the south, well
down into Sonora and Chihuahua, westward to the Colorado
river, northward into the Hopi and Navaho country, and eastward
as far at least as western Texas. From this mountain
rendezvous they swept down upon the Mexicans and Indians of
Sonora and Chihuahua, and on the Pueblo villages of the north,
while in later years they terrorized the white settlers of the
entire Southwest. To follow them was a fruitless task which
often led to the destruction of the pursuers.</p>

<p>The primitive Apache was a true nomad, a wandering child
of Nature, whose birthright was a craving for the warpath, with
courage and endurance probably exceeded by no other people,
and with cunning beyond reckoning. Although his character is a
strong mixture of courage and ferocity, the Apache is gentle and
affectionate toward those of his own flesh and blood, particularly
his children. Fear, to him, is unknown. Death he faces with
stolid indifference; yet Apache men have been known to grieve
so deeply over the loss of a friend as to end their troubles by
self-destruction.</p>

<p>No people could be better fitted than the Apache to conduct
continuous predatory warfare. Every form of plant and animal
life pays him tribute. An entirely naked Indian, without implements
of any sort, would stop on a mountain slope and in a few
minutes be sitting by a cheerful fire preparing a welcome meal.
With a fragment of stone he would shape fire-sticks from the dead
stalk of a yucca. Sitting with the flattened piece held firmly by
his feet, a pinch of sand at the point of contact between the two
sticks, with a few deft whirls of the round stick over his improvised
hearth the lone traveller would soon have a fire kindled.<pb n="015" /><anchor id="Pg015" />
Into the blaze he would cast a few sections of green, juicy mescal<note place="foot"><p>The agave or maguey plant, locally called mescal, for which reason the latter term is
here employed.</p></note>
stalk which, when cooked, would afford him both food and drink.
This part of his meal finished, the Apache might gather other
dead yucca stalks, split them, and often find within small stores
of honey.</p>

<p>Many plants furnish small seeds rich in nutriment. These
are gathered in a basket, ground on a metate, and the oily mass
formed into a ball with the hands. The Apache assert that a
lump as large as one's two fists would subsist a man for two days;
but in addition he would eat wild greens of various kinds, either
cooked or raw. One of the principal vegetal foods of the
Apache is the mescal—in their language, <hi rend="font-style: italic">náta</hi>. Nothing can give
a better idea of the economic life of these people than a description
of one of their annual mescal harvests.</p>

<p>The mescal harvest occurs in the season of new life and
growth, when the call from the wild is strong in the blood, and
like a class of children—for they are but grown-up children—they
pour out into the wilds. From the camp where they
have passed the winter they take to the trails which lead to
the mescal hills.</p>

<p>For some hours after leaving the huts on White river the
path leads across the hot, dusty desert; then it reaches the rim of
White river cañon and follows its edge so closely that a pebble
tossed from the saddle would drop into the torrent more than a
thousand feet below. How musical the roar of the stream, and
how cool its waters look! As the trail passes some especially
dizzy spot the Indian women lean away from the sheer edge in
fear. For miles the trail traverses the bluff. At times the river
is out of sight and hearing, then it emerges again and both eye
and ear receive its greeting. At the hour when the piñon trees
stretch their long shadows across the land the Indians urge their
horses down a steep, winding trail and arrive at the river's bank.
Here they ford, follow the course of the stream for a while, and
then at a bend reach an open flat dotted here and there with<pb n="016" /><anchor id="Pg016" />
shapely live-oaks. In this park-like opening the long straggling
line comes to a halt.</p>

<figure url="images/image15.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Cutting Mescal - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Cutting Mescal - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>All the worldly possessions of the Apache woman are packed
on the horse which she and her children have ridden. The
mother, with the youngest in her arms, first clambers down,
followed by the little girl four years of age; she then removes
the blankets that cover the pack, then the burden basket containing
her cooking utensils, next the water bottle, and from
across the saddle seat the large rawhide carryall that contains
the family supplies and extra clothing. A smaller rawhide
bag holds those little essentials necessary to the comfort of the
family. The unloading finished, the woman fills the water
bottle at the stream and gathers fuel for preparing the simple
meal, which is soon over. If anything is more simple than the
cooking it is the preparation of the bed. A small circular spot is
cleared and an armful of grass, if any exists, is spread over it; the
blankets are laid on the grass, and the bed is made. The blankets
may not be clean, and certainly the pallet is not downy, but this
matters little to a people inured to hardship; they are happy.</p>

<p>With a laugh the children tumble upon the blankets. Being
dressed in a single garment a little girl innocently exposes more
of her body than meets with her modest mother's approval. The
scolding is full and positive. Little Miss Apache, sitting in the
middle of the blanket with her knees drawn to her chin and with
scant skirt now tucked carefully about her feet, looks up with
roguish smile, then down at her wiggling toes in coquettish
defiance.</p>

<p>From far down the stream resound the splash of water and the
merry laughter of matrons and maidens bathing in the clear pools,
and from above the more boisterous shouts of men and boys.
Surely he who says the American Indian is morose, stolid, and
devoid of humor never knew him in the intimacy of his own
home.</p>

<p>With the coming of light the women are at work building
the campfires, and the rising sun finds them at their morning
meal. The breaking of camp is a brief task. To-day they are to<pb n="017" /><anchor id="Pg017" />
cross the divide, ford Black river, and continue on to the mountains
where the mescal grows abundantly. Travel in the cool
morning hours is a delight, and seven o'clock finds the party well
on its way. The long cavalcade winds slowly over the mountain
trail. Just ahead is a mother with two children, a little girl astride
behind her and a two-year-old boy standing in her lap. The
mourning dove sounds its melancholy note from the forest, and the
children take up the call. The little boy is not very proficient in
the imitation, and sister corrects him time after time. Truly, in
Indian-land, nature study begins early in life.</p>

<p>There is noticeable change in the vegetation. The giant
yuccas appear almost as a forest to-day; yesterday there was none.
Soon the party gains the summit of the range, before which winds
the valley of the Black with miles of placid stream in view.
Quite different is this from White river, which is ever hurrying,
rushing along. The Black flows within its grassy banks for long
distances with scarcely a ripple; then a whirling rapid is passed,
beyond which glides another long stretch of almost silent water.</p>

<p>However, mescal does not grow by cool streams, and the trail
again leads up into high mountains. On a broad slope well
toward the summit the final halt is made. Close by is the mescal
pit, perhaps twenty feet in diameter and three feet deep; it may
have been used a hundred years or a thousand, abandoned for a
long period, and then brought into use again. Each time it is
employed it must first be cleaned of the refuse from the last burning;
this done, a large supply of fuel is gathered and thrown in,
and over all are piled great quantities of stones.</p>

<p>Then begins the harvest of the mescal. With baskets on their
backs the women go out to gather the plants. Their implements
consist of a stick about two inches in diameter and three feet long,
wedge-shaped and sharpened at one end, and a broad hatchet-like
knife. On reaching a plant, the woman places the sharp end of
the stick at its base and by a blow with a stone severs the root and
pries it up. Nothing could be more primitive. The women of
the Stone Age who gathered mescal on the same ground, and
perhaps used the same pit, thus far must have used identical tools.</p>

<pb n="018" /><anchor id="Pg018" />

<figure url="images/image16.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Mescal - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Mescal - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>When the plant is cut from its root it is turned over and
trimmed. For the latter the women employ the hatchet-like
knife, cutting off the outer ends of the leaves. The plant now
resembles a large head of cabbage and weighs from five to twenty
pounds. As fast as the plants are cut the women place them in
the burden baskets and carry them to the pit, load after load.
To make it possible for each woman to identify her mescal
after the cooking, each piece is branded with a distinguishing
device—a property mark. The gathering of the mescal continues
for several days, an area covering a radius of perhaps two
miles being stripped of its budding plants, for such only are
harvested.</p>

<p>The pit being ready and the mescal gathered, the work of
cooking commences. Just at daylight the old woman in charge
takes her place at the rim of the pit and prays that the cooking
may be successful and that the people may be in condition to
partake of the food. In igniting the fuel the old-fashioned fire-sticks
must be employed; to use matches would bring ill fortune.
When the fuel in the pit becomes a blazing mass the women
go to prepare breakfast, but are soon at work again gathering
brush and grass to cover the mescal. Within four hours the fuel
is entirely consumed and the red-hot stones have settled to the
bottom of the pit. When it is certain that no fuel remains
unburned, as even a small amount of smoke would spoil the quality
of the mescal, the head-woman says, "It is good," and with great
eagerness her followers begin to fill the pit. There is need for
haste in throwing in and covering the mescal, as the steam must
be confined to prevent the hot stones from scorching it. The
covering consists of alternate layers of green brush, grass, dry
leaves, and finally a layer of earth, about six inches in thickness.
After forty-eight hours of steaming the seething mass is uncovered
and each woman removes her portion.</p>

<p>The greater part of the product of this cooking is now to be
prepared for winter use by pulling the leaves apart and pounding
them into pulp. This can be kneaded and handled much the
same as dough, and while in this plastic state is formed into<pb n="019" /><anchor id="Pg019" />
large cakes two inches thick and perhaps three feet long. These
are dried in the sun, when they have all the appearance of large
slabs of India rubber, and are easily packed on horses for the
homeward journey.</p>

<p>This dried mescal may be eaten without further preparation,
but it is generally made into a gruel by mixing with water. Alone
it is very sweet, and berries of the aromatic sumac, and frequently
walnuts, are crushed with it to give it flavor.</p>

<p>The fruit of the opuntia, or prickly-pear cactus, which the
Apache call <hi rend="font-style: italic">hush</hi>, is much used for food both in its fresh state
and dried. It is picked from the plant with pincers of split
sticks. When the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tú̆tza</hi>, or burden basket, is filled its contents
are poured on the ground and the fruit is brushed about with a
small grass besom until the spines are worn off. In preparing
<hi rend="font-style: italic">hush</hi> the women grind seeds and pulp into a mass, thus retaining
the full food value of the fruit.</p>

<p>Manzanita, piñon nuts, juniper berries, acorns of the scrub
oak, fruit of the yucca, wild potatoes, wild onions, mesquite pods,
and many varieties of fungi also furnish food. As a drink the
Apache make a tea from the green or dried inner bark of
the piñon.</p>

<p>The intoxicant and curse of their lives is <hi rend="font-style: italic">túlapai</hi>, or <hi rend="font-style: italic">tizwin</hi> as
it is sometimes called. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Túlapai</hi> means "muddy or gray water."
It is, in fact, a yeast beer. In preparing it corn is first soaked in
water. If it be winter time the wet corn is placed under a sleeping
blanket until the warmth of the body causes it to sprout; if
summer, it is deposited in a shallow hole, covered with a wet
blanket, and left until the sprouts appear, when it is ground to
pulp on a metate. Water and roots are added, and the mixture
is boiled and strained to remove the coarser roots and sprouts.
At this stage the liquid has the consistency of thin cream soup.
It is now set aside for twenty-four hours to cool and ferment,
when it is fit for drinking. As the <hi rend="font-style: italic">túlapai</hi> will spoil in twelve
hours it must be drunk quickly. Used in moderation it is not
a bad beverage, but by no means a pleasant one to the civilized
palate. The Apache, however, knows no moderation in his<pb n="020" /><anchor id="Pg020" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">túlapai</hi> drinking. He sometimes fasts for a day and then drinks
great quantities of it,—often a gallon or two—when for a time
he becomes a savage indeed.</p>

<figure url="images/image17.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Filling the Pit - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Filling the Pit - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Another intoxicant, more effective than <hi rend="font-style: italic">túlapai</hi>, is made from
the mescal—not from the sap, according to the Mexican method,
but from the cooked plant, which is placed in a heated pit and
left until fermentation begins. It is then ground, mixed with
water, roots added, and the whole boiled and set aside to complete
fermentation. The Indians say its taste is sharp, like
whiskey. A small quantity readily produces intoxication.</p>

<p>Of game foods the Apache has deer, antelope, and wild
turkey, with quail, some water fowl, smaller birds, rabbits, and
wood-rats. Fish and bear meat are strictly tabooed.</p>

<p>The graphic art of the Apache finds expression chiefly in
ceremonial paintings on deerskin, and in basketry. Only rarely
have they made pottery, their roving life requiring utensils of
greater stability. Such earthenware as they did make was practically
the same as that of the Navaho, mostly in the form of
small cooking vessels. Usually the pictures are painted on the
entire deerskin, but sometimes the skin is cut square, and at others
ceremonial deerskin shirts are symbolically painted. Occasionally
the Apache attempts to picture the myth characters literally;
at other times only a symbolic representation of the character
is made. In addition to the mythic personages, certain symbols
are employed to represent the incident of the myth. These
paintings are made under the instruction of a medicine-man and
are a part of the medicine paraphernalia. On some skins the
most sacred characters in Apache mythology are represented
symbolically—Nayé̆nĕzganĭ, the War God; Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ, his
younger brother; Kútĕrastan, the Creator of All; Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
the chief goddess. In fact the symbolism on an elaborately
painted deerskin may cover every phase of Apache cosmology.</p>

<p>In their basketry the Apache women display great taste
in form, and in their more superior work employ much symbolic
decoration. Since the beginning of the present "messiah
craze" all baskets display the sacred symbols believed to have been<pb n="021" /><anchor id="Pg021" />
revealed to Das Lan by Chuganaái Skhĭn—a combination of the
cross and the crescent. There are many baskets, made before this
new religious wave swept over the tribe, into which the symbolism
has since been woven.</p>

<p>The basket most used is the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tú̆tza</hi>, or burden basket, roughly
and loosely woven, ornamented with circular lines as often painted
on as woven in. Previous to a messiah craze, which had its
origin with the Apache about 1901, the designs in these baskets
were purely decorative, without attempt at symbolism; but now,
by order of a crafty old medicine-man, every <hi rend="font-style: italic">tú̆tza</hi> must display
the combined cross and crescent.</p>

<p>The <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi> is a water bottle, made invariably of withes of the
aromatic sumac, loosely woven, and coated inside and out with
piñon gum. To use material other than sumac would be considered
very bad. In the Apache deluge myth the people, instructed
by Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, built a monster <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi> of piñon branches in which
they floated away.</p>

<p>The <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsa-naskú̆dĭ</hi> is a bowl or tray-shaped basket of splendid
form, with symbolic decoration of intricate pattern.</p>

<p>The most pretentious basket is the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus-naskú̆dĭ</hi>, in general form
like the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>, but much larger; it is used for the storage of grain.
Its lines are most beautiful, as are also its inwoven symbolic designs.</p>

<p>Owing to the extremely secretive nature of the Apache, it is
difficult for the casual student to learn anything of the relations
between their mythology and the designs used in their basketry.
Questioned, they will perhaps say, "We don't know," or "To
make it look pretty." But an intelligent and trustworthy interpreter
will tell you, "That woman knows, but she will not tell."
A law of the cult brought about by the recent messiah religion
is that every woman must have in readiness for use during the
migration to the future world a <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>, a <hi rend="font-style: italic">tú̆tza</hi>, a <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsa-naskú̆dĭ</hi>, and
a gourd drinking-cup, all decorated with the cross and crescent.
These are not used and are carefully preserved.</p>

<p>The clan and gentile systems of the American Indians have
been the bulwark of their social structure, for by preventing intermarriage
within the clan or the gens the blood was kept at its<pb n="022" /><anchor id="Pg022" />
best. Added to this were the hardships of the Indian life, which
resulted in the survival only of the fittest and provided the foundation
for a sturdy people. But with advancing civilization one
foresees the inevitable disintegration of their tribal laws, and a
consequent weakening of the entire social structure, for the Indians
seem to have absorbed all the evil, and to have embodied little
of the good, that civilized life teaches.</p>

<figure url="images/image18.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Covered Pit - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: The Covered Pit - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The Coyoteros are divided into five bands, each consisting of
a number of clans, although in one band there are now survivors
of a single clan only, while in others as many as seven or eight
clans are still to be found. Descent among the Apache generally
is reckoned through the mother; that is, the children belong
to their mother's clan. An exception to this rule is said by
"Peaches," an old Apache scout under Crook, to exist among
the Chiricahua, where the children take the gens of the father.
Among the Apache some of the younger generation are inclined
to disregard tribal laws respecting marriage, but in former times
they were rigidly enforced, marriage within the clan or the
gens being regarded as incestuous. When asked what would
happen if a man and a woman belonging to the same clan should
marry, one old man answered that both would be quickly put
to death.</p>

<p>In the Appendix are given the clan names of the Coyoteros,
also of the Arivaipa and the Chiricahua. Geronimo, Chato, and
Cochise were members of the Aiahá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, People of the East, clan.
Most of the clan names are derived from localities in which the
ancestors of the clan are supposed to have first lived.</p>

<p>With the Apache, as with other tribes, the clan organization
has an important bearing on property right. Regardless of what
property either spouse may hold or own at the time of marriage,
the other immediately becomes possessed of his or her moiety.
Should the wife die, her husband retains possession of the property
held in common so long as he does not remarry, but what might
be termed the legal ownership of the wife's half interest becomes
vested in her clan. Should he attempt to dissipate the property
the members of the deceased wife's clan would at once interfere.<pb n="023" /><anchor id="Pg023" />
If the widower wishes to marry again and the woman of his choice
belongs to the clan of his former wife, then he and the new wife
become owners in common of all personal property held by him;
but if the second wife belongs to a different clan from that of
the former wife, then the husband must make actual transfer of
half of the common property to the clanspeople of the deceased
woman, who inherited the legal interest in it at their relative's
death. The same tribal law applies in the case of a widow.</p>

<p>Much internal strife naturally results whenever an actual distribution
of property is made. In the first place the surviving
spouse unwillingly relinquishes the moiety of the property to
the relatives of the deceased, and the immediate relatives often
disagree with the remainder of the clan. In former times death
of one or more members of contending clans often resulted when
the division of much property was made. Having no tribunal for
making an equitable division, the matter was left to mutual agreement,
resulting in disputes and frequently murder.</p>

<p>With the breaking up of the clans, together with the rapid
disintegration of ancient customs and laws, this property law is
fast becoming forgotten; but so recently as 1906 such disputes as
those mentioned occurred under both the Fort Apache and San
Carlos agencies, creating no little ill-feeling. In one instance
a man refused to deliver possession of half of his little herd of
horses to his deceased wife's clanspeople when contemplating
marriage with another woman, and appealed to the missionaries
for aid. He was compelled to make the division, however, before
he could remarry.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MYTHOLOGY - CREATION MYTH</head>

<p>There was a time when nothing existed to form the universe—no
earth, no sky, and no sun or moon to break the
monotony of the illimitable darkness. But as time rolled on,
a spot, a thin circular disc no larger than the hand, yellow on
one side and white on the other, appeared in midair. Inside
the disc sat a bearded man but little larger than a frog, upon<pb n="024" /><anchor id="Pg024" />
whom was to fall the task of creating all things. Kútĕrastan,
The One Who Lives Above, is the name by which he is now
known, though some call him Yŭádĭstan, Sky Man.</p>

<figure url="images/image19.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Apache Still Life</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Apache Still Life</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Kútĕrastan, as if waking from a long sleep, sat up and rubbed
his face and eyes with both hands. Then bending forward, he
looked up into the endless darkness, and lo! light appeared everywhere
above him. He then looked down, and all below became
a sea of light. A glance to the east created yellow streaks of
dawn, another to the west the saffron tints of the dying day,
both soon becoming obscured by numerous clouds of many hues,
formed by his looking around and about in all directions.</p>

<p>Again with both hands Kútĕrastan wiped his eyes and sweating
face and, rubbing his hands together as if he were rolling a
small pebble between the palms, suddenly parted them with a
quick downward fling, and there before him on a shining, vaporless,
mirage-like cloud sat a little girl no larger than a doll.
Kútĕrastan directed her to stand up, asking where she intended to
go, but she replied not. He cleared his vision once more with
his hands, then proffered his right hand to the girl, Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
Woman Without Parents, who grasped it, with the greeting
"Whence came you?"</p>

<p>For reply Kútĕrastan merely repeated her question, adding,
"Look to the east, it is light! There will be light in the south,
in the west, and in the north." And as she looked she saw light.
He then came out upon the cloud.</p>

<p>"Where is the earth?" asked Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, to which Kútĕrastan
replied by asking:</p>

<p>"Where is the sky?" Then requesting that he be not disturbed,
he began to sing: "I am thinking, thinking, thinking,
thinking what shall I do next." Four times he thus sang, at
the end of the fourth time brushing his face with his hands,
which he rubbed briskly together and parted quickly; and there
before him stood Chuganaái, the Sun. Raising his left hand to
his brow, from the sweat thereon, which he rolled in his hands
as before, Kútĕrastan let drop from his right palm a small boy,
Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn.</p>

<pb n="025" /><anchor id="Pg025" />

<p>The four sat upon that still cloud for a time as if in reverie,
the first to break the silence being he who commenced the
creation: "What shall we do next? I do not like this cloud
to live upon, but we are to rule and must stay together. How
dreary it is here! I wish we had some place to go." And then
he set to work again, creating Nacholécho, the Tarantula, who
was later to help in completing the earth, and Nôkusé, the Big
Dipper, whose duty it would be to befriend and to guide. The
creation of Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn, the Wind, Ndídĭlhkĭzn, the Lightning
Maker, and the clouds in the west to house Ndísâgocha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Lightning
Rumbler, whom he placed in them at the same time, next
occupied his attention. Then turning to Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Kútĕrastan
said, "Truly this is not a fit place in which to live; let us make
the earth." And so saying he at once began to sing, "I am thinking
of the earth, the earth, the earth; I am thinking of the
earth," which he repeated four times. As he ceased, Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
Chuganaái, and Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn each shook hands with him.
Sweat from their hands adhered to his. He at once began rubbing
his palms, when suddenly there slipped from between them
a small brown body, no larger than a bean. Kútĕrastan kicked
it and it expanded; Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> then kicked it and its size further
increased; Chuganaái next gave it a severe blow with his foot
and it became larger still; a kick from Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn made it
greater yet. Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn, the Wind, was told to go inside and
blow outward in all directions. This he did, greatly expanding
the dimensions of that body, now so wide that they could hardly
see its edge. The Lightning was next directed to exert his
strength, so with a terrific flash and roar he penetrated the body
to its centre, spreading it still wider. Then Tarantula was called
on to assist, and accordingly he started off to the east, spinning
a strong black cord, on which he pulled with all his might;
another cord of blue was spun out to the south, a third of yellow
to the west, and a fourth of glistening white to the north. A
mighty pull on each of these stretched the surface of that dark
brown body to almost immeasurable size. Finally Kútĕrastan
directed all to cover their eyes with their hands, and when they<pb n="026" /><anchor id="Pg026" />
opened them a moment later they beheld Nigostú̆n, the Earth,
complete in extent. No hills or mountains were there in sight,
nothing but a smooth, treeless, reddish-brown plain.</p>

<p>Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn, the Wind, scratched his chest and rubbed his
fingers together, when out from between them flew Dátĭlyĕ, the
Humming-bird. Dátĭlyĕ was told to make a circuit of the earth
and report what he saw. He started off toward the east, circled
south, west, north, and back from the east. All was well; the
earth was most beautiful, very smooth, and covered with water on
the western side.</p>

<p>But the Earth was not still; it kept shifting and rolling and
dancing up and down, so Kútĕrastan made four great posts—colored
black, blue, yellow, and white—to support it. Then he
directed Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> to sing a song. She sang, "The world is
made and will soon sit still." These two then stood and faced
Chuganaái and Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, when into their midst came
Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn, who dashed away to the cardinal points with
the four posts, which he placed under the sides of the earth;
and upon them it sat and was still. This pleased Kútĕrastan,
so he sang a song, repeating, "The world is now made and sits
still."</p>

<p>Then Kútĕrastan began another song, referring to the sky.
None existed as yet, and he felt there ought to be one. Four
times he chanted the song, at the end of the fourth time spreading
his hands wide before him, when lo! there stood twenty-eight
men and women ready to help make a sky to cover the earth.
He next chanted a song for the purpose of making chiefs for the
sky and the earth, and at its close sent Ndídĭlhkĭzn, the Lightning
Maker, to encircle the world. Ndídĭlhkĭzn departed at once, but
returned in a short time with three very uncouth persons, two girls
and a boy, whom he had found in the sky in a large turquoise
bowl. Not one of them had eyes, ears, hair, mouth, nose, or teeth,
and though they had arms and legs, they had neither fingers nor
toes.</p>

<p>Chuganaái at once sent for Doh, the Fly, to come and erect
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">kaché̆</hi>, or sweat-house. It took but a short time to put up the<pb n="027" /><anchor id="Pg027" />
framework, which Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> covered closely with four heavy
clouds: a black cloud on the east, a blue one on the south, a
yellow one on the west, and a white one on the north. Out in
front of the doorway, at the east, she spread a soft red cloud for
a foot-blanket after the sweat. Twelve stones were heated in a
fire, and four of them placed in the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kaché̆</hi>. Kútĕrastan, Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
Chuganaái, and Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn each inspected the sweat-house
and pronounced it well made. The three newcomers were bidden
to enter and were followed by Chuganaái, Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn,
Ndídĭlhkĭzn, Nôkusé, and Doh. The eight sang songs as their
sweat began. Chuganaái led, singing four songs, and each of the
others followed in turn with the same number. They had had a
good sweat by the time the songs were finished, so Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
removed the black cloud and all came out. She then placed the
three strangers on the red-cloud blanket, and under the direction
of Kútĕrastan made for them fingers, toes, mouth, eyes, ears, hair,
and nose. Then Kútĕrastan bade them welcome, making the boy,
whom he called Yádĭlhkĭh Skhĭn, Sky Boy, chief of the sky
and its people. The second he named Nigostú̆n Nalí̆n, Earth
Daughter, and placed her in charge of the earth and its crops;
while to the third, Hádĭnĭn Nalí̆n, Pollen Girl, was assigned the
care of the health of the earth's people. This duty also devolved
upon Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, but each looks more to the welfare of his
own sex than to that of the other.</p>

<figure url="images/image20.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Among the Oaks - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Among the Oaks - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The earth was smooth, flat, and barren, so Kútĕrastan made a
few animals, birds, trees, and a hill. Then he sent Ágocho, the
Pigeon, to see how the world looked. Four days later Ágocho
returned and said all was beautiful, but that in four days more
the water on the opposite side would rise and flood the land.
Kútĕrastan at once created a piñon tree. This Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> skilfully
tended until it grew to be of gigantic size at the end of
four days. Then with four great limbs as a framework she
made a very large water bottle, <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>, covering it with gum
from the piñon. When the water appeared as predicted, Kútĕrastan
went up on a cloud, taking his twenty-eight helpers with
him, while Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> summoned all the others and put them<pb n="028" /><anchor id="Pg028" />
into the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>, into which she climbed last, closing the mouth at
the top.</p>

<figure url="images/image21.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Mescal Camp - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Mescal Camp - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The flood completely submerged the earth for twelve days.
Then the waters subsided, leaving the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi> on the summit of the
hill Kútĕrastan had made. The rush of the waters had changed
the once smooth, level plain into series of mountains, hills,
rivers, and valleys, so that Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> hardly knew where they
were when she opened the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi> and came out. Tázhĭ, the Turkey,
and Gấgĕ, the Crow, were the first to make a tour of the land.
At the base of the hill they descended into a small muddy alkaline
creek, in which the Turkey got the tips of his tail-feathers
whitened, and they have been white ever since. On return they
reported that all looked beautiful as far as they had travelled.
Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> then sent Ágocho to make a complete circuit and let
her know how things appeared on all sides. He came back much
elated, for he had seen trees, grass, mountains, and beautiful lakes
and rivers in every direction.</p>

<p>Directing the others to remain where she left them, Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
summoned Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, Hádĭntĭn Naln, Ndídĭlhkĭzn, and
Ágocho, and took them up in a cloud, in which they drifted until
they met Kútĕrastan and his band of workers, who had completed
the sky during the time of the flood. The two clouds floated to
the top of the hill on which stood the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>. All descended to the
valley below, where Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> marshalled them into line, that
Kútĕrastan might talk to them. He briefly told them that he was
going to leave them and wished each one to do his part toward
making the world perfect and happy. "You, Ndísâgocha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, shall
have charge of the clouds and the water. You, Yádĭlhkĭh Skhĭn,
I leave in charge of the sky. Nigostú̆n Nalí̆n, you are to look
after the crops of our people; and you, Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, must care
for their health and guide them." He then called Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> to
him and placed her in charge of all.</p>

<p>The people stood in line facing their god, with hands extended
as if in supplication. Kútĕrastan and Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> stood
facing each other. Each rubbed their thighs with their hands,
then cast their hands downward, and there arose between them a<pb n="029" /><anchor id="Pg029" />
great pile of wood. Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> knelt and slipped a hand under it,
and as she did so Kútĕrastan passed his hand over the top. Great
white billowy clouds of smoke at once issued forth, rising straight
skyward. Into these Kútĕrastan disappeared. All the other gods
and goddesses soon followed, leaving the twenty-eight whom
Kútĕrastan had made to build the sky to remain upon the earth
and people it. Chuganaái went east to travel with the sun;
Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> departed westward to make her home in clouds on
the horizon, while Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn and Hádĭntí̆n Nalín sought
homes among the clouds in the south, and Nôkusé may still be
seen in the northern sky at night.</p>

<p>The Apache is inherently devoutly religious; his life is
completely moulded by his religious beliefs. From his morning
prayer to the rising sun, through the hours, the days, and
months—throughout life itself—every act has some religious
significance. Animals, elements, every observable thing of the
solar system, all natural phenomena, are deified and revered.
Like all primitive people, not understanding the laws of nature,
the Apache ascribe to the supernatural all things passing their
understanding. The medicine-men consider disease evil, hence
why try to treat evil with drugs? Disease is of divine origin,
so to the beneficent and healing gods the Apache naturally
make supplication for cure.</p>

<p>The Apache, even if willing, could not directly impart their
religious beliefs or their philosophy. It is only by study of their
myths, myth songs, and medicine practices, and by close observance
of their life, that a comprehensive idea of such beliefs can
be gained.</p>

<p>A concise outline of the mythology of the Apache is given in
the following description of the painted medicine skin<note place="foot"><p>This medicine skin was owned by Háshkĕ Ní̆lntĕ and was considered one of the most
potent belonging to any of the medicine-men. During the lifetime of Háshkĕ Ní̆lntĕ it was
impossible for any white man even to look upon this wonderful "medicine." After reaching
extreme age he was killed, presumably by his wife, from whom this valuable and sacred
object was procured.</p></note> shown
in the accompanying plate.</p>

<pb n="030" /><anchor id="Pg031" />

<p>A—The nucleus of the universe, called Chalhké̆lh Nalíín,
Night Girl. In the beginning it was merely a spot of color in
which, during the course of time, a form appeared, and later
emerged. This was Kútĕrastan, the Creator.</p>

<p>B—Kútĕrastan, the Creator of All, is standing on the clouds,
his first home, holding lightning in each hand. To his left is
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>, or water bottle, in which the people of the earth took
refuge from the flood shortly after their creation. Above him
are four clouds, those into which he departed when leaving the
earth for his celestial abode. He first created several assistants,
who in turn created others by rubbing sweat and small particles
of cuticle from the face and body.</p>

<p>C—Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, the chief goddess, first helper of Kútĕrastan,
is seen standing on the clouds. In her right hand is a piñon tree,
from the branches and gum of which the large <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi> was made
at the time of the deluge. Above her flies Dátĭlyĕ, the Humming-bird,
who was sent as a messenger about the world to
note how its creation progressed.</p>

<p>D—Chuganaái Skhĭn was the second person created by
Kútĕrastan. He followed Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, and is therefore third in
importance of the many deities. Not only does he give light
to the day, but he has the power to relieve and cure disease with
the aid of the first beams of his morning light. The Apache
ask his blessing before sunrise, generally imploring his beneficence
"as soon as you look upon me." The serrated circles typify
the abodes of these gods, which are protected by insurmountable
barriers.</p>

<p>E—Here the sun as first made by the great creator is
pictured. As time wore on, it grew to become the full round
disc it now is.</p>

<p>F—The moon as first made by Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, at the behest of
Kútĕrastan, who asked that she make something to illumine the
night. The streaks represent catamenia, and the gradual growth
of the moon is assumed to be parallel with prenatal growth.</p>

<p>G—This single symbol, a maltese cross, represents the four
personages who made the stars. They have to do with the stars<pb n="032" /><anchor id="Pg032" />
only, and are not prayed to as deities having power over the
people on earth.</p>

<figure url="images/image22.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Sacred Buckskin - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>

<p>EXPLANATION OF PLATE</p>

<p>A—Chalhké̆lh Nalín, Night Girl<lb />
B—Kútĕrastan, The One Who Lives Above<lb />
C—Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Woman Without Parents<lb />
D—Chuganaái Skhĭn, Sun Boy<lb />
E—Chuganaái, The Sun<lb />
F—Klĕganaái, The Moon<lb />
G—Yádĭlhkĭh Bĭnálzĕ, Sky Messengers<lb />
H—Nigostú̆n Bĭká Bĭnálzĕ, Earth Messengers<lb />
I, J—Nasté̆lh, Makers of Dreams and Visions<lb />
K—Hádĭlhkĭh, Lightning</p>

<p>Disc L<lb />
1—Nayé̆nĕzganĭ, Slayer of Alien Gods<lb />
2—Dutlí̆shĭ Skhĭn, Turquoise Boy<lb />
3—Yólkai Skhĭn, White-Shell Boy<lb />
4—Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, Pollen Boy</p>

<p>Disc M<lb />
1—Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ, Born From Water<lb />
2—Yádĭlhkĭh Skhĭn, Sky Boy<lb />
3—Yólkai Skhĭn, White-Shell Boy<lb />
4—Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, Pollen Boy</p>

<p>Disc N<lb />
1—Yólkai Nalí̆n, White-Shell Girl<lb />
2—Dutlí̆shĭ Nalí̆n, Turquoise Girl<lb />
3—Ĕnásho Dĭlú̆hklí̆shĕn, Black Alien Talker<lb />
4—Hádĭntĭn Nalí̆n, Pollen Girl</p>

<p>Disc O<lb />
1—Hádĭntĭn Nalí̆n, Pollen Girl<lb />
2—Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn, The Wind<lb />
3—Yólkai Nalíí̆n, White-Shell Girl<lb />
4 —Yakósha Skhĭn, Frost Boy</p>

<p>P—Gáŭncho - Gods<lb />
Q—Gaŭnchĭné̆  - Gods<lb />
R—Gáŭn - Gods<lb />
S—Gaŭnchí - Gods</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Sacred Buckskin - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>H—Another maltese cross, symbolizing four spirits of the
air, who act as messengers of the gods. They are supposed to
communicate with the medicine-men, bringing to them words
of wisdom from the several gods as they sit and chant in ceremony,
or when they are fasting. Their name, Nigostú̆n Bĭká
Bĭnálzĕ, Earth Messengers, indicates that their powers extend
to both the earth and the sky.</p>

<p>I and J symbolize spirits of the air who reveal to the
medicine-men the wonders they claim to know in a priestly way.
Such revelations are made to them in visions as they sit and
drum and sing when endeavoring to discover some new cure for
an affliction, or to initiate new customs that might be pleasing to
the gods. The priests often take a medicine skin of this sort
and go out into the mountains, where they fast and sing over it
for hours at a time, awaiting the coming of the spirits.</p>

<p>K—It is supposed that any of the various gods have the
power of calling on the lightning to carry messages from one to
the other. Wherever shown in the symbolism of the Apache,
lightning lines are drawn to indicate communication from one
god to another.</p>

<p>Disc L 1—Nayé̆nĕzganĭ is the first son of Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, who
was made to conceive by the sun's rays as she lay asleep on the
eastern slope of a mountain. He is the War God and miracle performer,
the culture hero who in parallel legends appears in many
North American aboriginal cults. Great monsters in the form
of giant antelopes, rolling stones, and beasts of hideous conception
are supposed to have inhabited the earth for a time, destroying its
people. These monsters typify only the evils of this life; in fact
death itself is spoken of in many legends as one of the monsters,
in such form engaging in a long discussion with the miracle
performer to prove that he should not be destroyed; if he
were, the earth would become overpopulated. With his bow
and arrow and turquoise lance Nayé̆nĕzganĭ banished these curses
from earth. He himself was invulnerable as he appeared before<pb n="033" /><anchor id="Pg033" />
these monsters, for the reason that he always buried his veins
near a tree before attacking them. After he had killed them all,
he and his younger brother, Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ, quarrelled. The
Bluebird revealed to the latter the spot where Nayé̆nĕzganĭ kept
his veins buried, so he sought them out and shot arrows into
them, thus killing him. Other myths relate how Nayé̆nĕzganĭ
was later resurrected, and he is still prayed to as the chief
War God.</p>

<figure url="images/image23.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Apache Girl</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Apache Girl</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>2—Dutlí̆shĭ Skhĭn was created within the blue clouds at
the time they were made, and emerged from them. He took
part in the creation, assisting Kútĕrastan and Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> in finishing
their work. At their direction he made a few people and
many birds and animals.</p>

<p>3—To Yólkai Skhĭn is attributed the creation of all white
things. He himself was brought into existence in the white
cloud, and on emerging therefrom immediately began the work
of making white rock and shells under the direction of Kútĕrastan
and Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</p>

<p>4—Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn is the God of Disease and Health. It is
he who causes much sickness and he who can cure any disease,
if he be so disposed. Especial care is taken by the Apache not
to arouse his displeasure, and he is supplicated and propitiated
whenever disease appears among them.</p>

<p>Disc M 1—Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ, the second son of Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
is the God of Water, because his mother conceived as she slept
one afternoon under a ledge of rock from which drops of water
trickled upon her. In the dance for rain all prayers and songs
are addressed to him. It was he who created the ocean.</p>

<p>2—Yádĭlhkĭh Skhĭn is Chief of the Sky. In the origin story
the Lightning was sent to encircle the earth to find how things
appeared on all sides. On his return he brought back with him
a large turquoise bowl containing three ill-formed persons, one
of whom was Sky Boy. Later all three were put through a
sweat-bath and their bodies perfected.</p>

<p>3—Yólkai Skhĭn, described above.</p>

<p>4—Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, described above.</p>

<pb n="034" /><anchor id="Pg034" />

<figure url="images/image24.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Ford - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: The Ford - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Disc N 1—Yólkai Nalí̆n, one of the most venerated and
greatly feared personages in the Apache mythology. She is the
Goddess of Death, or rather of the after-life, for she controls all
souls that pass on to the future world. The road to this afterworld
is supposed to cross her shoulders and is symbolized by the
Milky Way, a trail made by the departing spirits. The Apache
will not utter the name of a deceased person, because they say the
dead have gone on to Yólkai Nalí̆n and are her people. If they
talked of them it might anger her, and when their death ensues
she might refuse them admittance to the eternal paradise. This
goddess is supposed to preside over the birth of children, hence
supplications and offerings are made to her immediately before
childbirth. She is invoked at other times to withhold her call,
for it is believed that she can cause death. These prayers are
addressed to Yólkai Nalí̆n through the medium of small white
shells and white stone beads. The white beads are symbolic of
purity, and through them Yólkai Nalí̆n is asked to keep the minds
of the people free from evil thoughts or deeds.</p>

<p>2—Dutlí̆shĭ Nalí̆n, the Turquoise Girl, is the creator of all
things green. She has to do with the crops in the fields, and
the devout Apache prays to her every morning during the season
of growth.</p>

<p>3—Ĕnásho Dĭlhklí̆shĕn is the God of Intellect. He controls
the minds of the people, making their thoughts good or evil at
will. It was he who first talked to the people on earth. When
a child is born its parents often pray that Kútĕrastan will make
it grow to be like Ĕnásho Dĭlhklí̆shĕn, to whom prayers are
addressed for aid when one must talk to the people. In such case
no offering of pollen is made unless the request be presented to an
image representing this god, when pollen is sprinkled upon it.</p>

<p>4—Hádĭntĭn Nalí̆n is Chieftainess of Pollen, because she
causes pollen to grow on the trees. The Indians know the
function of pollen in plants and pray that their corn and other
products of the fields, as well as the nuts and fruits that grow
wild, may be fructified early in the season, to insure good
harvests.</p>

<pb n="035" /><anchor id="Pg035" />

<p>Disc O 1—Hádĭntĭn Nalí̆n, described above.</p>

<p>2—Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn, Chief of the Winds. The Apache never
complains of the wind, for should he become impatient about
them and give vent to sacrilegious utterances he might anger
the Wind God and thereby bring on destructive storms.</p>

<p>3—Yólkai Nalí̆n, described above.</p>

<p>4—Yakósha Skhĭn, God of Moisture and also Controller of
Rain. Since snow, ice, hail, frost, dew, and fog are derived
from the clouds, Yakósha Skhĭn is sometimes termed Chief of the
Clouds, but in general the clouds are regarded as his workshop,
for there is another who has direct charge and control of them.</p>

<p>P, Q, R, and S—These figures represent gods, or, in Apache,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi>, who are supposed to have been made by the Sun for the
purpose of curing people stricken with bodily disease. Diseases
of the body are regarded as distinct from those of the mind. The
<hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi> live in the four cardinal directions and are impersonated in
medicine ceremonies by men wearing stick masks, who always
take stations at the four sides of the patient. These doctors are
not called in case of illness until after the four chief deities have
been supplicated, when, as a last resort, the medicine-man prays
to the <hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi>. If the <hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi> cannot help, there is believed to be no
hope for the patient. In ancient times all animals could talk, and
many were used as beasts of burden. The bear and the deer
were the horses of that time. In the graphic representations
of the Apache these four spirits are often pictured riding deer
and bear.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MEDICINE AND MEDICINE-MEN</head>

<p>The medicine-men of the Apache are most influential personages.
They are usually men of more than ordinary ability,
claiming, through their many deities and their knowledge of
the occult and ominous, to have supernatural power. In sickness
any individual may make supplication to the deities, but
the prayers of the medicine-men are accepted as being most
efficacious.</p>

<pb n="036" /><anchor id="Pg036" />

<figure url="images/image25.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Apache Medicine-man</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Apache Medicine-man</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Many of the medicine-men have some knowledge of the
medicinal properties of plants and generally make use of them in
the treatment of disease, but their treatment consists more of
incantation than aught else. Even in collecting the plants they
invoke the deities, usually facing the cardinal points in turn.
In case the prescription calls for a combination of herbs or other
vegetal products, the number four is always strictly adhered to; it
might be a decoction made of four roots of one variety or of a
single root from each of four varieties of plants.</p>

<p>Every Apache medicine-man has a medicine skin, his <hi rend="font-style: italic">ĕpú̆n ezchí</hi>,
inscribed with the symbolism of the tribal mythology. With
his prayer wands he rehearses the symbolic figures, praying to the
mythical characters who are regarded as most efficacious in the
particular ailment under treatment. In his own little <hi rend="font-style: italic">kówa</hi>, or
dwelling, with the painted deerskin spread before him, on which are
delineated the symbolic representations of a score of gods comprising
the Apache pantheon, a medicine-man will sit and croon
songs and pray all day and all night in the hope of hearing the
voices of celestial messengers.</p>

<p>Many of the prayers and songs of the Apache medicine-men
are very beautiful. The following is an example:</p>

<p>1 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Stĕná pĕhí̆nda nzhóni, tógonĭl ádahĕ bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>2 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Inaté̆sh nzhóni bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>3 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ĕnŭdé̆tsos nzhóni bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>4 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ĭnyátĭl nzhóni bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>5 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Bé̆hnandahĭ ĭnkéhĭ tógonĭl ádahĕ bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>6 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ĭndú̆h bĭnandáhĕ bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>7 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Bĕh nashálolĕzh ndĕ; nashéyo shĭchí̃sĭgo<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> zhó<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>dolĕzh.</hi></p>

<p>8 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ndĕ shĭnklóho bĕh sanandáhĕ bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>9 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Bĕh sanashádo bé̆oĭshka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>10 <hi rend="font-style: italic">No oskó<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>go adĭshní daházhĭ bĕhnashádo ti ndĕ ta nashéyo
go<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zhódo.</hi></p>

<p>11 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Shágocho paógo násha.</hi></p>

<p>12 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Akúd ndĕ sa nzhóni yé̆sĭtchĭ yé̆atido.</hi></p>

<p>13 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Pídi yú̆gga sa nzhóni yé̆kĭssĭn shí̃dĭl é̆ndo.</hi></p>

<p>14 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Shĭtú̆h gozhó<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>dolĕzh pógo hádĭshndi.</hi></p>

<pb n="037" /><anchor id="Pg037" />

<p>1 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, you are good, I pray for a long life.</hi></p>

<p>2 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray for your good looks.</hi></p>

<p>3 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray for good breath.</hi></p>

<p>4 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray for good speech.</hi></p>

<p>5 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray for feet like yours to carry me through a long life.</hi></p>

<p>6 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray for a life like yours.</hi></p>

<p>7 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I walk with people; ahead of me all is well.</hi></p>

<p>8 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray for people to smile as long as I live.</hi></p>

<p>9 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray to live long.</hi></p>

<p>10 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I pray, I say, for a long life to live with you where the good
people are.</hi></p>

<p>11 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I live in poverty.</hi></p>

<p>12 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I wish the people there to speak of goodness and to talk
to me.</hi></p>

<p>13 <hi rend="font-style: italic">I wish you to divide your good things with me, as a brother.</hi></p>

<p>14 <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ahead of me is goodness, lead me on.</hi></p>

<p>While this prayer is worded as if uttered by the supplicant,
it is in reality offered by the medicine-man in his behalf.</p>

<p>There are head medicine-men and medicine-men of lesser
degree. The man who becomes influential enough to be considered
the head medicine-man of the tribe is more of a politician
than a doctor of diseases, and in important cases only is
he called to treat in a healing ceremony. It requires a particularly
capable Indian to attain the position of head medicine-man,
for to do so he must not only make the people subservient
to his will, but must wrest the leadership from some other and
usually older medicine-man who is himself an influential character.
Unfortunately it is apt to be the most crafty, scheming man who
gains such power over his tribesmen.</p>

<p>A case in point was the recent strife between Das Lan and
Goshonné. For some years the latter, an Indian of exceptional
ability and withal apparently an honest man in his treatment of
diseases, was the head medicine-man of the White Mountain
Apache. Then it came to pass that the crafty old Das Lan
of the Cibicu had his vision, in which was revealed a special<pb n="038" /><anchor id="Pg038" />
message brought by Chuganaái Skhĭn from Kútĕrastan to the
Apache people. This was the beginning of the present so-called
messiah craze.</p>

<figure url="images/image26.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Maternity Belt - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Maternity Belt - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>From the first there was promise of a battle to the end between
Goshonné and Das Lan. Goshonné well knew that if the new
cult gained a firm footing he would lose his influence and at best
be but a mediocre medicine-man. Das Lan, on the other hand,
knew that he must break the power of such a man as Goshonné,
if he was to assume the leadership. Goshonné scoffed and scorned,
and would have none of the new belief. Still, he was an Indian,
and the prophecies of his rival gradually filled him with superstitious
fear, while his followers were either deserting him openly
or were secretly joining the ranks of the enemy. Death was predicted
for the members of Goshonné's own family, and well could
Das Lan make such prophecies, for Goshonné's two brothers were
already stricken with tuberculosis. First one died, then the other.
Das Lan could now point to him and say, "That is what Kútĕrastan
does to those who do not believe!" It was thus that Goshonné's
power finally was broken and Das Lan became a seer.</p>

<p>Sacred pollen, <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭntĭn</hi>, is used in all ceremonies, particularly
in those designed for healing. The principal source of <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭntĭn</hi>
is the tule, but much of it comes from the piñon. For prayers
invoking an abundance of corn, pollen is mixed with cornmeal.
Not only do the medicine-men use this powder, but each individual
carries a small quantity of it in a deerskin pouch somewhere
about his person. In the pollen may be small medicine
trinkets—sometimes consisting of a few shell beads from prehistoric
ruins—and there is scarcely a person, old or young,
who does not have a small section of the candle cactus fastened
somewhere about his clothing.</p>

<p>When childbirth approaches, the medicine-men are always
summoned. Nothing can give a better idea of the medicine rites
on such an occasion, and of the use of sacred pollen, than a description
of a maternity belt procured by the writer and here illustrated.
So far as can be learned, this belt is very old, so old that its
painted symbolic figures have been three times renewed. Belts<pb n="039" /><anchor id="Pg039" />
of this kind are very rare, and are hired whenever their use is
required. The owner of this particular belt, a widow, did not care
to dispose of it; as she expressed it, "it is like a husband": the
remuneration from granting its use was sufficient to support her.</p>

<p>The belt is made from skin of the mountain lion, the
black-tail deer, the white-tail deer, and the antelope—animals
which give birth to their young without trouble. Medicine-men
are called in to pray to the spirits of these animals when a
woman approaching confinement puts on the belt. It is worn
for a day or so only, but constantly during the critical period, not
being removed until after the child is born. Prayers are made,
first by a mother or father for their daughter, then by a medicine-man,
and lastly by the patient to the gods and elements depicted
on the belt. These figures are all connected with lightning lines.
The first one to the left is Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>; on the same portion is the
Snake Girl, Klĭshcho Nalí̆n; the next is Nayé̆nĕzganĭ, the third
Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ, and the last Yólkai Nalí̆n. The sharp points
around the circular abodes of the two goddesses represent barricades
for protection. At the real homes of these deities, none
can pass through these barriers.</p>

<p>Each of the gods from left to right is prayed to successively,
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭntĭn</hi> is sprinkled around them afterward. Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> is
the first to be addressed by the prospective mother:</p>

<p>"We are your children. When you gave birth to your
children, it caused you no trouble. Make me like yourself, that
my child, soon to be born, may come into this world easily and
quickly, without pain to me."</p>

<p>Next the Snake Girl is prayed to:</p>

<p>"Klí̆shcho Nalí̆n, you came into this life with ease. Do what
you can for me now, that my child may come in like manner."</p>

<p>Then to Nayé̆nĕzganĭ:</p>

<p>"Help my babe, soon to be born, to come as you did—quickly,
easily, and without pain."</p>

<p>The belt in Nayé̆nĕzganĭ's left hand represents the one worn
by his mother, Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, when he was born. There was a time
when skirts, too, having the same magic power the belt is<pb n="040" /><anchor id="Pg040" />
supposed to possess, were worn by women at childbirth. One
such is shown in the hand of Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ, next pictured, to
whom the woman addresses a prayer much the same as the last.
The skirt also is the one worn by Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> when the two
brothers were born.</p>

<figure url="images/image27.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Medicine Cap and Fetish - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Medicine Cap and Fetish - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Yólkai Nalí̆n is the favorite goddess from whom, in their
belief, the Apache women are endowed with great beneficence.
She lives in the skies, where all souls go. The prayer to her is,
as to the others, "Save me from pain and let my child come
as you did."</p>

<p>Clouds at the feet of Nayé̆nĕzganĭ typify the bounties of the
world into which it is hoped and prayed the child will be
happily born.</p>

<p>The prayers finished, <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭntĭn</hi> is sifted over all the figures.
Beginning at the left, the lightning line is followed into
Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'s abode, which is then encircled, and the sacred
powder is liberally sprinkled around and over her body. Each
figure is treated in like manner.</p>

<p>The accompanying plate shows a medicine-cap made by
Yotlú̆nĭ, a medicine-man, about forty years ago, to cure a boy
of lightning stroke which had impaired his reason, and a small
wooden image of a god recently made to be carried by a girl
troubled with nervousness. On both these objects the gods
and elements which cause afflictions and which alone can give
relief are symbolically represented.</p>

<p>The central figure on the cap pictures Ndídĭlhkĭzn, Lightning
Maker, with lightning, <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭlhkĭh</hi>, in zigzag lines above
his head and beneath his feet. The broad arch indicates
clouds with rifts in them, out of which the evil came and
into which it may return. The cross of abalone, the small
white bead, and the eagle feather are media through which
Tu Ntĕlh (Wide Water), Yólkai Nalí̆n (White-Shell Girl), and
Itsád Ndé̆yu (Eagle People) are supplicated.</p>

<p>The cap was worn at night by the boy, whose parents each
morning at sunrise prayed to the various gods and elements
represented on it, invoking them to take back that which they<pb n="041" /><anchor id="Pg041" />
had left with the boy, and adding: "Keep us even in temper and
mild and clean in action. We do wrong at times, but that is
not our wish. If our minds are kept clean we will do nothing
bad. We wish to have good thoughts and to do good deeds.
Keep our minds clear that we may think them and do them."
After each prayer <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭnĭn</hi> was sifted upon the symbol representing
the deity addressed.</p>

<p>As the boy soon recovered, the virtue of the cap was attested,
and subsequently its owner often hired it to others.</p>

<p>The little wooden image represents Hádĭnĭn Skhĭn, Pollen
Boy, God of Health. The painted figures on the skin pouch in
which it is carried are similar to those on the cap, and all are supplicated
in the same manner. The medicine-man who made the
image and pouch received a horse from the father of the patient in
payment; but not the least interesting feature of the case for which
these objects were made is that the god of the natives received all
the credit for the efficient treatment given the afflicted girl for a
year by the reservation physician.</p>

<p>Dry-paintings, or figures drawn upon the ground with colored
earths, were used in the Apache healing ceremonies, but never to
a great extent, and of late years they have been practically abandoned.
These paintings, compared with the beautiful, conventional
productions of the Navaho, are crude; in making them
the Apache always attempt to picture the objects literally rather
than to represent them conventionally or symbolically.</p>

<p>On the infrequent occasions when the dry-paintings are
employed, the medicine-man in charge of the ceremony directs
his assistants, at daylight, to begin the painting. When it is
finished he takes his station close to the easternmost figure of the
painting, on its northern side. At the right of the medicine-man
sit twelve chosen singers with a drum. The four masked <hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi>, or
gods, at the same time take their places at the cardinal points.
The patient then enters from the east and sits down on the head
of the large figure in the centre of the dry-painting. As he does
so the medicine-man commences to sing, and is joined by the
chorus at once. They may sing the song four times, or sing four<pb n="042" /><anchor id="Pg042" />
different songs, or any multiple of four, at the pleasure of the
medicine-man. When the songs are finished the four masked
personages scrape the colored earths into a heap about the patient
and rub them in handfuls over his body. If this ceremony
proves to be ineffectual, it is believed to be the will of the gods
that the patient be not cured.</p>

<figure url="images/image28.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Das Lan</hi> - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Das Lan</hi> - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE MESSIAH CRAZE</head>

<p>Among the Apache, in the spring of 1906, the excessive
use of a combined cross and crescent symbol was noted. Men,
women, and children had this anchor-like design cut into
wood, tin, and metal talismans, and also tattooed on their faces
and branded on their horses. It was used also as a decorative
device in much of the new basketry and worked in beads on their
moccasins, and new shirts and waists seldom failed to display a
cross in narrow yellow and black ribbon in front.</p>

<p>Four years before this time a forceful old medicine-man
living on the Cibicu, in a remote corner of the Apache reservation,
either through the influence of a vision or other hallucination,
or by a desire to become the ruling spirit in the tribe,
proclaimed the gospel of a messiah who, he claimed, had appeared
to him in the hills and would later return to the deliverance of his
tribespeople.</p>

<p>In childhood this future prophet was given the name Das Lan,
Hanging Up, by which designation he is commonly known in
familiar discourse among his tribesmen; but on the census rolls
of the White Mountain agency he is recorded simply as "V-9."
On becoming a medicine-man in his youth, in accordance with
tribal custom he adopted the name—what may be termed a professional
title—Dó<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ĭ Tlí̆shĭ Nôĭltá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sh, which signifies Turquoise
Rolling Stone.</p>

<p>As hitherto mentioned, the Apache is the personification of
devoutness in the performance of his religious duties, and no
matter where circumstances may place him, he manages always to<pb n="043" /><anchor id="Pg043" />
have a small pouch of <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭntĭn</hi> carefully secreted about his person
for use in paying his devotions to half a score of gods, at least
once every four days. If occasion demands, he may pray every
day, or four times a day, or any multiple of four times. This
custom has a direct bearing on the story of the messiah, which
is this:</p>

<p>Das Lan, in a spirit of more than usual devotion, began a
series of prayers to the gods of Life, Peace, and Plenty, delivered
as usual just as the sun appeared over the eastern mountains. On
the fourth morning, with offerings of <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭntĭn</hi>, he invoked the
benediction of Kútĕrastan, the Creator, Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, God of
Health, Hádĭntĭn Nalín, Goddess of Crops, and of Chuganaái
himself, the All-seeing Sun. As the fourth pinch of pollen
wafted away on the breeze there appeared the vision, immediately
beneath the sun, of a small bearded dwarf, less than three
feet in height, who approached him, and said:</p>

<p>"I am a messenger sent by Kútĕrastan to talk to you. The
Sun is my father; I have just left him to come to you. You are
to inform all your people that a change is about to be made
in their lives and in the nature of the whole world. In place
of this life of strife and toil with little to eat, all, the white
man as well as the Indian, will be taken to a place where all
things grow without labor, and where there will be no rough,
barren mountains, but instead broad valleys filled with grass,
trees, corn, fruits, nuts, and all kinds of game in abundance.
There, too, you will meet all your fathers and mothers and
brothers and sisters and children who have gone before you from
their homes, for they are now there. There no sickness or death
will visit anyone. The old and feeble will become strong, the
crooked straight, and the blind shall see. But to be taken, all
must have faith, believing as one, and observe these instructions
I am to leave with you. You are commissioned to instruct the
people. Those who believe must adopt the <hi rend="font-style: italic">dáiita ílhnaha</hi>, the
cross and crescent, as a symbol of faith, for it represents the shape
the new world will have and the road all must travel to reach it,
and any who start on the journey without using this sign will be<pb n="044" /><anchor id="Pg044" />
lost on the way. When the time comes to depart, I will return
to lead you. A great cloud, open in the centre, will come down
from above and surround us all, so that none shall see whither he
goes. Until then those who would go must do as you bid them.
All males, boys or men, must have caps of deerskin with the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">dáiita ílhnaha</hi> marked on them in beads on four sides, and two
eagle feathers attached to the top, ready to wear on the journey.
They must also have new shirts, leggings, and moccasins upon
which this figure has been made in black and white.</p>

<figure url="images/image29.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Apache Village</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Apache Village</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>"The girls and the women must likewise have new clothing,
bearing the sacred symbol, ever in readiness. All their water
bottles, burden baskets, and saddlebags must also bear the sign,
and should any desire to ride horses, only the best, fleet and strong,
branded upon the left buttock with the <hi rend="font-style: italic">dáiita ílhnaha</hi>, may be
taken. The permanent homes of all people living in bands under
a chief must no longer be scattered, but must be built close
together in long rows, that no time may be lost in assembling
when our Great Father wills that you depart from this life to go
to that where all is peace and plenty. Until that time, which
is not far off, you must conduct yourselves as I have directed,
discarding also all old medicine symbols for the new."</p>

<p>The plain Greek cross and the crescent have been used by
the Apache as decorative and religious symbols from early
times, but this recent adaptation of the combined form came as
a sudden wave.</p>

<p>With an unusually strong personality, Das Lan had long been
held in fear by those who knew him best, and with his story of
the new messiah he soon became of great prominence in the tribe.
Das Lan first made confidants of the leading spirits in the various
bands, who in turn converted others to the new faith before
public announcement was made. Having won the strongest men
in the tribe through personal appeal to their vanity, the crafty
Das Lan could now remain at home, enjoying the prosperous
practice that grew out of his new cult.</p>

<p>Throughout the reservation those most deeply affected by the
messiah belief have been appointed spies over the others. If any<pb n="045" /><anchor id="Pg045" />
persist in the use of old medicine paraphernalia, they are reported
at once and harassed by threats of plague, sickness, ill-luck, disaster,
and even death, which Das Lan claims to be able to cause or to
dispel at pleasure. Once the threat is made, nothing unwelcome
can happen to one under the ban that is not immediately attributed,
by all the medicine-man's disciples, to the disfavor of the gods;
and nothing more potent is necessary to convert the unbeliever,
for there is no Indian reared in the wilds who is not steeped
in the belief that his gods are all-powerful in both causing and
eradicating every ill.</p>

<p>About two years ago, on the Cibicu, a woman murdered her
husband. She did not deny the act, but pleaded justification, alleging
that her husband was guilty of unfatherly conduct toward his
daughter. The local authorities were very sceptical of her
defence, since the murdered man had always borne an excellent
reputation among both Indians and whites; but no contradictory
evidence could be adduced upon which to base an open trial, so
the matter became quieted. After time had cancelled the crime
in the mind of the guilty, it became known that the murder had
been committed at the instigation of the scheming Das Lan, who
found the deceased an obstacle to his prophetic assumptions, and
under the guise of an order from Kútĕrastan had him despatched.
Naturally fierce, strong, and bold, Das Lan has become more
emboldened by his success as a prophet, and indirect threats of
further crafty murders are sometimes uttered by the more fanatical
members in each band when anyone presumes to defy his creed
and will.</p>

<p>In 1903, throughout the White Mountain reservation, the
Government farmers found it difficult to persuade the Apache
to plant the usual corn. The following winter found them with
a scant food supply, and Government aid was neccessary to relieve
suffering. The cause of the failure to plant, none of the officials
then knew; but to his tribesmen Das Lan had prophesied the
probable advent of the messiah at that time—so why plant corn?</p>

<p>Another effect of Das Lan's prophecy is noted in the fact that
although a few years ago the Apache houses were scattered far and<pb n="046" /><anchor id="Pg046" />
wide, now there are many villages consisting of long straight
rows of grass-thatched huts, bearing testimony to that deep-seated
superstition which in the Apache apparently will never be
eradicated.</p>

<figure url="images/image30.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Sand Mosaic - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>This pictures an Apache dry-painting employed in an attempt to cure a paralytic about
the year 1882. The several figures are crude representations of masked deities—<hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi>. The
wavy lines are lightning symbols. The patient entered upon the central figure, when the
colored earths were gathered from about him and rubbed upon his body by masked men
personating the <hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi>.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Sand Mosaic - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>PUBERTY RITE</head>

<p>The ceremonial celebration of the arrival of the period of
puberty in girls is more rigidly adhered to than any ancient religious
rite or social custom in vogue among the Apache. By this
ceremony the social position of the girl is established, and she
is given assurance, on the eve of her womanhood, of a long,
happy, active life. At this critical period, if the favor of the
gods were not thus invoked in behalf of the girl, it might augur
ill for her in after life.</p>

<p>This Nalín Bagúdzĭtash, or Girl Dance, is held always at
dawn and is brought to a close when the sun shines full upon the
participants. The ceremony is conducted by a woman selected
from among the friends of the girl's parents for her comeliness,
activity, and good character. So far as the performance of the
successive parts of the ceremony is concerned, no special knowledge
on the part of the leader is required, as a medicine-man is
engaged to give the necessary directions and to sing the songs.
The girl lies on a blanket upon the ground, and her sponsor,
so to speak, straightens her arms and legs, rubs her joints, and
otherwise simulates remoulding and beautifying her body. The
girl then sits up, and those assembled dance and sing in a circle
about her. An eagle feather and a white-shell bead are tied in
her hair, and sacred pollen is rubbed on her face, in deference
respectively to the bird of war and the god and goddess of health
and fructification—Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn and Hádĭntĭn Nalín.</p>

<p>When the dancing is finished the sponsor takes a basket
of corn prepared for ceremonial use and deposits it fifty yards or
more to the east of the circle. The girl arises and runs around
the basket, then back to the blanket on the ground, followed by
little boys and girls. The godmother then moves the basket
farther away, and the girl runs around it again, followed by children<pb n="047" /><anchor id="Pg047" />
as before. This performance is repeated four times at the east of
the circle, after which the basket is carried around to the south
and the girl runs around it four times again, then to the west, and
lastly to the north. When she returns from her fourth run at the
north the girl stops on the blanket as usual, where the basket of
corn is emptied on her head. A lively scramble for the corn
follows on the part of all present, for it is deemed good fortune
to bear away a handful of the consecrated kernels, which, if
planted, are certain to be very prolific.</p>

<p>The act of running out and back, followed by children, symbolically
attests that the young woman will be strong and active
throughout life, beloved by her offspring, who will always follow
and obey her. That of pouring corn upon her head is an invocation
to the gods that she may be blessed with fruitfulness.</p>

<p>The girl wears her ceremonial raiment of whitened deerskin
or new white muslin, with a white feather, a stone bead, and a
piece of shell in her hair, for four days after the performance,
abstaining during that time from flesh and from food containing
salt, being careful, too, not to scratch herself with her fingers.
At the end of this period she bathes, dons her usual clothing,
and partakes of the customary food.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>DANCE OF THE GODS</head>

<p>The Gáŭn Bagúdzĭtash, or Dance of the Gods, is the one
ceremony of the Apache that bears any material resemblance to the
many Yébĭchai dances or "chants" of the Navaho, and even then
the only feature common to the two is that the men, typifying
gods, wear elaborate masks. The Apache are not unfamiliar
with the making and employment of dry-paintings for the treatment
of the sick, as has been seen. Originally the dry-paintings
and the <hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi>, or gods, always appeared together, but in recent<pb n="048" /><anchor id="Pg048" />
years the Gáŭn dance has been conducted preliminary to and as a
part of medicine, puberty, and war ceremonies. Captain Bourke,
in his "Medicine-men of the Apache" (Ninth Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology, 1892), speaks of this as the Spirit or Ghost
dance. Though performed infrequently now, as compared with
other dances, on account of the expense and of disapproval by the
agents, the Gáŭn Bagúdzĭtash is unquestionably the most popular
ceremony conducted by the Apache.</p>

<figure url="images/image31.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Apache <hi rend="font-style: italic">Gaŭn</hi></head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Apache <hi rend="font-style: italic">Gaŭn</hi></figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Four always, but generally five, deities are impersonated in
this dance—Gaŭnchĭné̆ of the east, Gáŭncho of the south, Gáŭn
of the west, Gaŭnchí of the north, and Gaŭnĕskí̆dĕ the fun-maker.
These are arrayed in short kilts, moccasins, and high stick hats
supported upon tightly fitting deerskin masks that cover the
entire head. Each carries two flat sticks about two feet in length,
painted with zigzag lines representing lightning.</p>

<p>For the dance a circular plot of ground, fifty or sixty feet in
diameter, is cleared of stones and brush, and four small cedar
trees are planted about its edge, one at each of the cardinal points.
All in attendance assemble in a circle outside the trees, leaving an
opening at the eastern side. Unheralded the five masked personators
march in from the east and take position in front of the
cedar trees, the fifth man standing behind the fourth at the northern
side. Four drummers with small drums and an indefinite
number of drummers around a large one, at a signal from the
medicine-man in charge, who sings, begin drumming. The personated
gods dance all about the circle, making motions with
their sticks as if picking up and throwing something away,
followed by blowing with the breath for the purpose of
expelling evil spirits from their midst. While this is going on
the fifth masker, Gaŭnĕskídĕ, performs antics designed to amuse
the audience. When the songs are finished the dancers depart in
an eastwardly direction, whence they came, and all rest.</p>

<p>The drummers begin the next period in the dance by beating
their tomtoms. As soon as they commence the <hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi> again
appear, coming from the east as before, and stop in single file in
front of the cedar tree on the eastern side. There the spectators<pb n="049" /><anchor id="Pg049" />
throw <hi rend="font-style: italic">hádĭntĭn</hi> upon them and offer prayers, after which the five
<hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi> take the same positions as before in front of the small trees.
Upon the trees little wheels of cedar twigs have been hung; these
the dancers now take, and each dances toward the fire in the
centre of the circle and back four times. As the gods dance back
and forth the people assembled in the encircling line shift their
positions, so that all the women are on the north side and all
the men on the south; then the entire body dances, with brief
intervals of rest, while twelve songs are sung. The maskers next
form in single file on the east, march around the fire, through
the flames of which each passes the ends of his two sacred wands
to destroy any lurking evil, then back around the eastern cedar
tree, again around the fire, then to the southern tree, and so on
to each of the four trees, when they take their leave.</p>

<p>This much constitutes that part of the ceremony in which
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">gáŭn</hi> are the chief participants and which usually occupies
half the night. The remainder of the night is consumed by the
performance of some ceremony forming the principal objective—often
the puberty rite above described.</p>

<figure url="images/image32.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Apache Maiden</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Apache Maiden</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="051" /><anchor id="Pg051" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE JICARILLAS</head>

<p></p>

<figure url="images/image33.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Lone Tree Lodge - Jicarilla</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Lone Tree Lodge - Jicarilla</figDesc>
</figure>

<div>
<pb n="053" /><anchor id="Pg053" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>HOME AND GENERAL CUSTOMS</head>

<p>The Jicarillas, or, as they are commonly called, "Jicarilla
Apaches," occupy a reservation of nearly four hundred
and fifty square miles of mountainous country in northern
New Mexico. Linguistically the Jicarillas are of the same stock
as the Apache of Arizona; but here the relationship ceases, for
the two peoples have virtually no knowledge one of the other;
each, according to their respective genesis myths, had their origin
in the general region in which they live to-day, while the dialect,
mythology, legends, and medicine rites of the Jicarillas more
closely resemble those of the Navaho than any of the Apache
groups. The designation "Jicarilla Apaches" is an inheritance
from the early Spaniards, who were wont to designate as Apache
any warlike tribe which had not been brought under subjection.
Such were the Apaches de Nabajú (Navaho), the Apaches del
Perrillo, the Apaches Gileños, Apaches Tejuas, Apaches Vaqueros,
Apaches Faraones, Apaches Llaneros, Apaches Lipanes, and a host
of others, of whom the Spanish missionaries and colonists had
little or no knowledge except that derived, alas, from predatory
raids on the peaceable Indians among whom they were established.
The name "Apache," therefore, was applied in the Rio Grande
country of New Mexico in much the same way as the term
"Yavapai" was given in the Rio Colorado region of Arizona, and,
naturally enough, it still survives.</p>

<figure url="images/image34.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>A Jicarilla</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: A Jicarilla</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Owing to their composite nature the Jicarillas are a peculiarly
interesting group. Too small in numbers to resist the cultural
influence of other tribes, and having been long in contact with
the buffalo hunters of the great plains as well as in close touch
with the pueblo of Taos with its great wealth of ceremony and
ritual, it is not surprising that the Jicarillas, in life and ceremony,<pb n="054" /><anchor id="Pg054" />
have been deeply influenced by adjacent tribes. As previously
stated, the Jicarilla medicine rites are much like those of the
Navaho, but are far simpler in character. In dress the Jicarillas
resemble the Indians of the plains, even to the feather headdress,
which is never worn by the tribes to their south and west.
Features of an annual fiesta have been borrowed directly from
the Pueblos.</p>

<p>The typical habitation of the Jicarillas is a tipi, or lodge,
called <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>, patterned after that of the Plains tribes.
Formerly they hunted the buffalo, making periodical excursions
from their mountain home to the plains and bringing back
quantities of prepared meat and large numbers of hides, which
were fashioned into tents and used for many other purposes. To
all intents and purposes, therefore, the Jicarillas were a plains
tribe. Only within recent years have they grown crops of any
kind. They exhibit fair skill in basketry, this being their chief
industry and source of barter with neighboring tribes; indeed it
was through this custom of making "little baskets" that the
Spaniards applied to them the name by which they are popularly
known. The Pueblos of the Rio Grande use many baskets,
which they obtain chiefly from the Jicarillas in exchange for
corn. During late years many of these <hi rend="font-style: italic">jicarillas</hi> have been
disposed of to traders. Like the Navaho they make but little
pottery, and that only for utilitarian purposes.</p>

<p>The Jicarillas seem to have no system of clans or gentes.
The tribe is divided into two bands—commonly called by their
Spanish names, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Olleros</hi> (Potters) and <hi rend="font-style: italic">Llaneros</hi> (Plainsmen)—within
which marriage is not prohibited. In the days of the buffalo a
part of the tribe, preferring the prairie country, remained there
for a short time and received the name Kolhkahí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, People of
the Plains. The others returned to the mountains and from
the pottery they there made were called Sait Ndĕ, Sand People,
sand being used in mixing the clay. In event of marriage between
members of different bands, sons born of the union belong
to the father's band, while daughters belong to the band of
the mother.</p>

<pb n="055" /><anchor id="Pg055" />

<p>Generally speaking, chieftainship is hereditary, passing to the
eldest son, if there be such, otherwise to a brother, on the death of
the incumbent; but this rule might be set aside if public opinion
were strong enough to warrant it, and the chief be selected
from another family. Each band has a headman, chosen by
reason of his personal bravery and worthiness. The tribal chief,
however, is the recognized leader, the two band chiefs being little
more than figureheads.</p>

<p>The social customs of the Jicarillas are well defined. A
young man wishing to marry sends a near relation to procure the
consent of the girl's parents, with whose decision the wishes of
the daughter have little weight. If the young man meets their
approval, he is sent out to hunt, and the game which he kills is
distributed among the girl's relations. The following day his
family build a <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> and place in it the personal effects of the
young couple, who, at night, enter with friends and kinsfolk.
A medicine-man prays to Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ, asking his beneficence
toward the new home. This ceremony lasts until midnight,
when the visitors depart and the marriage is consummated. Polygamy
was common. Divorce is effected without ceremony, the
discontented one deserting the other and leaving him or her
in possession of the dwelling.</p>

<p>Property right is governed by tribal laws. The wife's belongings
are inherited by her children or, if she should have none, by
her parents, not by the husband. On the death of the husband
his property passes to the children and the wife.</p>

<p>The dead are buried in secret, only a few of the close relations
having knowledge of the place. Immediately after death the body
is carried on horseback to a high point, where it is placed on
the ground and covered with the personal possessions of the
deceased, such as clothing, blankets, saddles, and weapons, and
over all are heaped brush and stones. Formerly a man's horse
was killed near his grave, and sometimes as many as three or
four horses were similarly sacrificed at different places. In
former times also the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> was burned after the burial, and
members of the family cut their hair as a sign of mourning.<pb n="056" /><anchor id="Pg056" />
The souls of the dead are believed to rise skyward. In one
portion of the sky, among vast herds of buffalo, all those who
have met death in battle assemble, rich and happy; in another
part, those who have succumbed to sickness and old age. The
evil, or those who have practised witchcraft, have a place apart
from the rest. Between the latter and the spirits of the good
stands a high rock wall at which the evil ones are condemned to
dig for eternity in an effort to reach the happier home. Spirits
can work only in darkness, and the work of the night is ever
brought to naught by recurring daylight.</p>

<figure url="images/image35.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>A Jicarilla Feast March</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: A Jicarilla Feast March</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The Jicarillas, like their kindred the Navaho and Apache, pay
much attention to religion and ceremony. Compared with the
Navaho their life seems almost lacking in ceremony, but when
contrasted with the various Yuman tribes on the Colorado and
Gila rivers of Arizona it is fairly rich. Their healing or medicine
rites include a dance, called <hi rend="font-style: italic">Isánĕ</hi>, that occupies four days and
four nights, and many one-day "sings," in all of which dry-paintings
are employed. Like the Apache the Jicarillas attach much
importance to the girls' puberty ceremony and still rigidly adhere
to it.</p>

<p>A four-day medicine dance is founded on the following legend:</p>

<p>Two maidens lived at the bottom of a deep pit. Many of the
men wished to marry them, but the girls were well content and
refused to come out. The Bear and the Snake formed a plan to
carry them off and make them their wives. A beautiful butterfly
was sent fluttering down over the girls' heads, but they paid
little heed to its beauties. Another was sent, then another, and
yet a fourth, which was so beautiful that the girls reached up to
catch it, for they wished to copy its splendid colors on a large
basket they were weaving. But the butterfly escaped them and
flew upward, keeping ever out of reach as the girls followed to
the mouth of the pit. There the Bear and the Snake in waiting
suddenly reached over, seized the girls, and carried them away.
The people, learning of this, asked them to bring the girls back,
but the Bear and the Snake refused, so an appeal was made to
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ and Kobadjischínĭ. These two gods built a fence<pb n="057" /><anchor id="Pg057" />
around the world to keep the Bear and the Snake from escaping,
and, summoning all the people, compelled the Bear and the Snake
to bring the two young women back. The one the Bear had
married had grown very fat and coarse, like her master. "What
have you done to make this girl so fat?" demanded Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ
in anger. "You must give her medicine to make her comely again."
So the Bear sang songs and made medicine until the girl was herself
again. Then came the Snake with the girl he had stolen.
She had become thin, like her master. "What have you done
to make this girl so thin?" cried Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ. "You must
give her medicine to make her well again." The Snake then
sang his songs and made medicine until the girl became again
robust and beautiful.</p>

<p>As already mentioned, the performance of this ceremony
extends through a period of four days and four nights. The day
preceding is spent in preparation: the head of the family of the
sick person makes ready for a feast, and helpers build a corral of
piñon and spruce branches. This corral is circular, about forty
yards in diameter and six feet high, with an opening at the east.
To the west, close to the fence, is the medicine <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>. The latter
part of each morning of the four days is spent by the medicine-man
and his assistants in the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>, where a dry-painting of blue,
black, yellow, and red earths is made in the shape of a snake lying
in a circle with a space between the head and the tail. The circle
is about six feet in diameter, and within it are represented numerous
animals: the bear, turkey, deer, eagle, buffalo, elk, badger, gopher,
and others. A decoction is mixed in an earthen bowl and the
patient is summoned. Sand from the various parts of the painting
are sprinkled on the corresponding parts of his body, and the
medicine mixture is given him to drink.</p>

<p>The night portions of the ceremony begin shortly after dark.
The medicine-man and any persons who know the songs gather
in the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> and sing, accompanied with a drum made of a basket
inverted over a hole in the ground and covered with a buffalo
skin, the head toward the east. The hole represents the pit in
the legend, the basket the one the girls were weaving, and a<pb n="058" /><anchor id="Pg058" />
figure interwoven in the latter symbolizes the butterfly of the
story. The beating of the drum is varied at intervals by the use
of a leg-bone of a mountain sheep rasped quickly over a notched
stick. Any men of the tribe may enter the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>, and even a
white man who is well known. The songs consist of recitals of
the powers of the medicine-man and invocations to the various
animals, as the bear, snake, and mountain sheep. Some of the
songs consist merely in naming the parts of the animal's body,
while others are supposed to be those used by the Bear and the
Snake in the legend. After singing these songs for about three
hours, with intervals of rest, the dancing begins. On each side
of the enclosure are three fires. Behind these on the north side
are the men, on the south the women; thus a large open space
is bounded by the two lines of fires, the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>, and the opening of
the corral. Two women walk slowly into this space, their heads
modestly bent. They stop, and a young man approaches to ascertain
with whom they would dance. He then finds the desired
persons, takes each by the arm, and drags him out. The men
always feign unwillingness to go. In the meanwhile other pairs
of women have come out and other young men become busy
finding partners for them. As a rule they dance in groups of
four, men and women facing each other and moving backward
and forward five or six steps. As the dance progresses the man
is likely to lay his hands upon the woman's shoulders, but modesty
forbids her a similar liberty. The same pair may remain dancing
together throughout the night, or they may cease when either
desires. On the first night the dancing continues until about
midnight; the second, an hour or two longer; the third, until
well toward dawn; the fourth, until sunrise.</p>

<figure url="images/image36.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Jicarillas</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Jicarillas</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>On the last night the top of a small spruce tree, tipped with
eagle down, is planted near the door of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>, and a new
element in the dancing is introduced. About midnight, before
any dancing has been engaged in, the ceremonial dancers enter
from two dressing <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> some two hundred yards east of the
corral. These consist of two parties. The first, eight in number,
enter in single file, preceded and followed by a man in everyday<pb n="059" /><anchor id="Pg059" />
costume. These dancers, called <hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>natí̆</hi>, are nude, save for
the breech-cloth, with body and face painted in white and black,
and the hair hanging loose. Immediately following them are the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Cha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zhiní̆</hi>, six in number, accompanied by four keepers, two in
front and two behind. The six are nude, the bodies painted solid
white with six black stripes encircling them. The hair is painted
white and is done up into two long, stiff braids, which project from
the sides of the head like a pair of horns. The faces are hideously
made up to represent clowns, as indeed their name signifies. In
dancing, the Cha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zhiní̆ and Tsa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>natí̆ do not take steps, but shuffle
sidewise, locomotion being effected by means of a sort of exaggerated
shivering of the legs. This movement is common to
Plains tribes in many of their dances. The whole line of dancers
proceed with their peculiar motion into the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> and around
the fire, passing before the patient, the Cha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zhiní̆ all the while
uttering hoarse, animal-like cries. Their utterances are always
coarse and obscene, causing much merriment, which is supposed
to aid the patient in casting off his illness. After passing through
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> the Tsa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>natí̆ form in line outside and with their feet keep
time to the singing and drumming, while the others break ranks and
in a promiscuous throng pass before the spectators, first on the men's
side, then on the women's. Just before their departure from the
corral any woman who feels an indisposition may crouch in their
path near the gate, facing the west, and the Cha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zhiní̆ one by
one leap over her, first from the east, then from the other three
directions, ever continuing their hoarse cries.</p>

<p>These characters make their appearance four times during the
course of the night, the spectators dancing during the intervals.
After their last exit dancing continues until shortly before sunrise;
then the medicine-man and the singers arise, and, forming a circle
about the fire in the centre of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>, sing a number of songs.
A maiden is summoned from the gathering to carry a basket of
sacred meal, and the medicine-man, taking up the top of the
spruce tree, passes out of the enclosure toward the rising sun, followed
by the maiden, the patient, the singers, and any who may be
afflicted with a bodily ailment. At a distance of about a hundred<pb n="060" /><anchor id="Pg060" />
yards the medicine-man stops and plants the little spruce tip, to which
the disease is now supposed to have been transferred, under a tree,
sprinkling over it quantities of the sacred meal. Then each of the
others, the patient leading, steps forward, throws a pinch of the
meal on the tree, and passes on, always facing the east. When
the last one has thus passed, the procession stops, everybody holds
his blanket ready, and on signal from the medicine-man, just as
the sun appears, gives it a shake and runs at full speed to the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> and around the fire. Thus is disease shaken out and the
pursuit of the evil spirits of sickness eluded.</p>

<figure url="images/image37.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Jeditoh - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>It is interesting to note the difference between the Apache of Arizona and the Jicarillas in
their assignment of colors to the cardinal directions. The former invariably associate black with
the east, blue with the south, yellow with the west, and white with the north.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Jeditoh - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MYTHOLOGY - CREATION MYTH</head>

<p>In the beginning all people, birds, and beasts were far
beneath this earth, somewhere in the darkness; there was no
sun, no moon. It was not a good place in which to live, because
of the darkness. After a time came Chunnaái, the Sun, and
Klĕnaái, the Moon. They directed the people to leave the world
of darkness, showing the way they were to go by passing up
through a rift in the sky. But the sky was so far above that the
people knew of no way to reach it, so they made a pile of sand
in the form of a mountain, and painted the east side white, the
south blue, the west yellow, and the north side all colors.[1] Then
they gathered seeds from all the plants they knew and placed
them inside the little mountain. Chunnaái sent back his messenger,
Ánltsĭstn, the Whirlwind, to instruct them how to make the
mountain increase in size.</p>

<p>Then all gathered about it and danced and sang, until after
four days the seeds sprouted and the mountain began to expand
and to increase in height. This continued for four days, at the
end of which time the mountain seemed almost to reach the sky;
but suddenly its growth ceased, and none knew the cause. From<pb n="061" /><anchor id="Pg061" />
Chunnaái came Whirlwind to tell the inhabitants how two
of their maidens had entered the sacred space on the mountain
top and had wantonly broken and destroyed plants and fruits, thus
causing the mountain to cease growing.</p>

<p>With two long poles and four buffalo horns, which then were
straight, the people made a ladder, which, when placed on the
mountain top, reached the sky. One of the four Great Whirlwinds,
Níchitso, went up to see what this new place was like. He
put his head through the opening, and seeing that the world was
covered with water, at once descended the ladder. The four
Whirlwinds then went up; White Wind rolled the water to the
east, but still there was water at the south; Blue Wind rolled
it away to the south, but still there was water at the west; so
Yellow Wind blew it away to the west, and then there was
water only at the north, which All-Color Wind quickly blew
away. Then the Winds blew over the earth for four days to dry
it; but they left some of the water, which flowed along in
streams.</p>

<p>When they returned and told what they had done, the people
sent Ká̑gĕ, the Crow, who was wise, to view the land. They
waited long, but Ká̑gĕ did not return. Then they sent Little
Whirlwind, who found the Crow perched upon some dead bodies,
plucking out their eyes; and because of his wickedness in forgetting
the people, his feathers, once white, had turned black. Then
Nagá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>schitn, the Badger, was sent to see if the land was good,
but just as soon as he had crawled through he sank in the black
mud and could go no farther, so Little Whirlwind was despatched
to succor him. To this day Badger's legs are black. Next
Kĕldi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>shé̆n, the Skunk, was sent, because he was light in weight;
but even he sank in the mud and blackened his legs. Then the
people sent Cha, the Beaver, who travelled about for a long time,
and finding all the water running away in streams, built dams and
thus formed many lakes. He came back and told the people that
the land was good to live in, which pleased them greatly. Then
they started up the ladder, and when all had passed over, it was
found that their weight had bent the buffalo horns, which ever<pb n="062" /><anchor id="Pg062" />
since have been curved. Thus all the people came out upon this
earth at a place in the north.<note place="foot"><p>Possibly a legendary reminiscence of a home in the far north and the subsequent migration
to the south.</p></note></p>

<p>During the first days the Sun did not rise above the horizon,
having been held back in the east by a web that Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sché̆,
the Spider, had woven about him. But the people succeeded
in tearing the web away, and from that time the Sun each day
has travelled across the whole sky.</p>

<p>On emerging from the underworld the inhabitants began
moving in a great circle, travelling from the north to the east,
then to the south, then to the west. When any found a spot that
pleased them, they settled there, and Chunnaái and Klĕnaái gave
them a language of their own. Four times the land was thus
encircled, but each time the circle became smaller, and when the
people came the last time to the north, Haísndayĭn, the Jicarillas,
found their home in the mountains near the Rio Chama.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MIRACLE PERFORMERS</head>

<p>During the wanderings of the people a girl, Yólkai Ĕstsán,
became separated from the rest. She would lie all day on a hillside
in the sunshine, and the Sun saw that no harm came to her.
By and by she bore a child, whose father was Chunnaái, the Sun,
and the child was Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ. Another girl, Ĕstsán Nátlĕshĭn,
was fond of lying asleep under a rock, and by the trickling water
that fell upon her Kobadjischínĭ was begotten.</p>

<figure url="images/image38.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Lake Lajara - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Lake Lajara - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The two women and their sons lived together. To amuse
the children the mothers made them a wheel, but cautioned them
never to roll it toward the north. Whenever he heard the sound
of water, Kobadjischínĭ, to seek its source, would leap straight into
any torrent, and his mother hoped that the toy would deter him
from falling into such danger. One day the two boys became
curious to know what was in the north, so they rolled the wheel
in that direction. It went straight on for a long time, then came<pb n="063" /><anchor id="Pg063" />
to a ladder leading up the steep side of a rock, up which it rolled.
The boys stopped in astonishment. The wheel rolled on down
into a cave, where lived Yíyĕ, a monster Owl, who ate human
flesh. A young girl, Yíyĕ's slave, was sent up to see who was
outside. "Two young, fine-looking boys," she reported. Yíyĕ
sent her to tell them to come into the cave, but this they refused
to do, even when he urged them himself, saying, "No! Give
us our wheel!" But at last the boys yielded to Yíyĕ's persuasions
and proceeded up the ladder and down into the cave. Owl
built a fire under a huge pot of water, seized the boys, and put
them into it. He boiled them a long time, then lifted them out
with a stick. They stood up and said, "Why do you not give us
our wheel and let us go home?" Then Yíyĕ became angry and
thrust them into a great heap of hot ashes and built a fresh fire
over them. After a long time he took them out, but they were still
unharmed, and only asked, "Why do you not give us our wheel?"
At this Owl became very angry and, seizing them, cut them
into small pieces, put them into the pot, and boiled them
again; but when he took them out they were alive and whole.
Owl said not a word, but gave them their wheel and motioned
them to go. All this time the mothers of the two boys knew
from the Sun where they were, and by a burning stick could tell
when their children were in danger; for if they were safe the
flame burned high, but if in danger it burned low.</p>

<p>Because there were so many monsters on the earth that
destroyed people, the mothers of Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ and Kobadjischínĭ
sent them on a visit to Chunnaái to learn how to kill
these evil beings. Chunnaái sent down the rainbow, and up this
the two boys climbed and went into the house of the Sun. For
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ the Sun made a complete suit of turquoise—shirt,
leggings, and moccasins—and in his hair fastened a long eagle
feather. He gave him also huge arrows made of pine trees
pointed with flint of white, blue, yellow, and all-colors, and a
bow made of a part of the rainbow. To Kobadjischínĭ he
gave a suit of flint of many colors and a long whip with which
to drive away sickness, and in his hair he tied a downy eagle<pb n="064" /><anchor id="Pg064" />
feather. Then he said to Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ, "Shoot down and see
if you can hit that tree." So Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ shot, and the
arrow shattered the tree like a bolt of lightning.</p>

<figure url="images/image39.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Into the Desert - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Into the Desert - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>After his return from the home of the Sun, Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ
and his mother, Yólkai Ĕstsán, went over to the pueblo of Taos,
where in a lake lived a monster Turtle which had destroyed many
people by dragging them beneath the water. Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ went
into the village and asked for food, but the people refused him,
not knowing who he was. In the night he sent worms into their
corn, spoiling it all; and in the morning, when they discovered
it, they were filled with fear, and said:</p>

<p>"You must be some great man. In the west is a large lake,
and in it a being which has dragged many of our people into the
water. Will you go and kill it?"</p>

<p>"I will kill it," replied Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ, "but first you must
give me as much turquoise as I now have in my suit."</p>

<p>This they did, and Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ asked Chunnaái how he
should kill this creature. His father gave him four wheels—white,
blue, yellow, and all-colors. Then from the east he threw
the white one into the middle of the lake, and the water receded
a little. From the south he threw the blue wheel, from the west
the yellow, from the north the wheel of all-colors, and each time
the water decreased a little more, until a ladder leading downward
was exposed. From the centre in four directions led rows of
large stones, upon which Turtle walked in going to his house.
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ went out on one of these stone-trails and down the
ladder. At the bottom he found two mountain lions, which he
quieted by giving them eagle feathers. He went through a long
passage and successively met two fierce bears, two snakes, and two
spotted wildcats, but each in turn was pacified with eagle feathers.
At the end of the passage was a door, which Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ burst
open, coming suddenly upon the great Turtle. The monster
tried in vain to seize and kill him, but Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ took out
his fire-stick, and said:</p>

<p>"Release the people you have here, or I will destroy you with
my fire!"</p>

<pb n="065" /><anchor id="Pg065" />

<p>"I have only one," said Turtle, "and you may take him."</p>

<p>When the one came out Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ asked him if there
were any more captives in the house, and the man said there were
many more. So again he threatened Turtle, and other prisoners
were released; but these were not all, and he compelled
Turtle to free still more. On the fourth demand, however, the
monster refused to give up any more of his prisoners, whereupon
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ killed him with his fire and smoke. Then going
through the rooms he released all the people he found. There
were two young Turtles, whom he told not to grow any larger,
nor to kill people or animals; and small Turtles yet inhabit
the land.</p>

<p>Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ heard that to the east of the mountains of the
Haísndayĭn lived Tzĕs, the enormous Elk, in the midst of a great
high plain, which no one could approach unseen. So he journeyed
thither, thinking to ascend the eastern side; but Elk saw him,
and he went no closer. Then he tried from the south, the west,
and the north, but always Elk saw him. At the northern side
of the plain Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ heard someone ask, "What are you
doing here?"</p>

<p>It was Maínĕli<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, the Gopher; and when he learned what
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ wished to do, he promised his help. So he burrowed
into the ground and came up under the spot where Elk
was lying, and just behind the shoulder gnawed away the thick
hair that protected the monster's heart. Elk felt the gnawing,
and cried out, "Who is doing that?"</p>

<p>Gopher answered, "I need fur to make a nest for my
little children."</p>

<p>So Elk became quieted and Gopher went back into the ground,
and from the centre dug holes in four directions to the edge
of the plain. Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ then entered one from the east,
and coming to the centre looked up and saw Elk's heart beating.
Drawing his flint-pointed arrow to the head, he shot the
monster through the heart, then quickly dropped down into
Gopher's burrow beneath four stones which, one below the
other, stopped the vertical channel. But first he made with his<pb n="066" /><anchor id="Pg066" />
fire-stick a dense white smoke at the end of the burrow that ran to
the east. Elk leaped down into the opening and rushed in the
direction of the smoke, seeking his enemy. Then in his rage he
went to the centre, but in the meantime Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ had
made a cloud of blue smoke at the south, so Elk ran thither.
Successively Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ made yellow smoke at the west and
all-color smoke at the north, each time at the mouth of the burrow,
and each time Elk ran in the direction of the newly made smoke.
All the time blood was pouring from the wound in Tzĕs'
heart. At last he espied the hole blocked with four stone doors
of white, blue, yellow, and all-colors, which led straight down
from the floor of the passage. With his great antlers the monster
broke through the first three doors, but at the fourth he fell
dead. Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ divided the meat with Gopher, and taking
the greater portion on his back, for by this time he was grown
large and strong, he started back to his mother, who was overjoyed
by his safe arrival and because he had brought such a
quantity of meat. Near the village he stopped to rest, and the
weight of himself and of Elk's body flattened the top of the hill
on which he sat. Where Elk's blood soaked into the ground
the soil is still red.</p>

<figure url="images/image40.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Nature's Mirror - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Nature's Mirror - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>From his father, Chunnaái, Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ had knowledge
of another evil thing and how to destroy it. Cutting off a piece
of Elk's intestine, he filled it with blood and fastened it about
his waist. Then he told his mother to strip off the hide and
while it was still soft sew it into a suit that would cover him
completely. When the suit was finished he put it on, hid Elk's
antlers under it, and departed westward in search of Itsá, the
Eagle, who every day killed a man. When Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ
approached the home of Eagle the latter swooped down from
his high rock and four times tried to seize him, but could not
fasten his talons in the hardened hide. At the fourth attempt
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ allowed Eagle to take hold of his suit in the
front, whereupon the bird carried him up and up, and from a
tremendous height dropped him upon the sharp rocks. Though
unhurt, to deceive Eagle he tore open the piece of intestine,<pb n="067" /><anchor id="Pg067" />
allowing the blood to gush out upon the rock. Itsá told his two
children to go and eat, but when they drew near Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ
made a sound, "Sh!" and they stopped in fright. Again they
came near and again heard the sound "Sh!" So the Eaglets
went to their father, perched high on the point of the rock, and
said:</p>

<p>"That body is not dead, it makes a noise 'Sh!'"</p>

<p>"Never mind that; go and eat!" commanded the parent
Eagle, who then flew away for his day's hunting.</p>

<p>When Itsá was gone, Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ arose, took off the elk-skin
suit, and addressed the frightened Eagle children:</p>

<p>"In what weather does your father come home?"</p>

<p>"In a great storm of thunder and lightning," they answered.</p>

<p>"And in what weather does your mother come home?"</p>

<p>"When all the sky is clouded and a slow rain falls."</p>

<p>Presently a great storm arose, and the Eaglets exclaimed,
"Our father is coming!" Soon the Eagle came rushing through
the air, and from afar Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ heard wailing, for Eagle
had a man in his talons. From far aloft, as was his wont, he dropped
the man upon the rocks. Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ took up one of Elk's
antlers and just as the great bird was alighting on his perch hurled
it at him, striking him on the head. Listening, he heard the
body drop upon the rocks far below. Then a slow rain began
to fall, and the Eaglets cried, "Our mother is coming!" Soon
the mother Eagle came. She too had a man in her talons,
and with the other horn Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ killed her. Then he
warned the Eagle children that they must not grow any larger, or
ever attempt to carry away people; and they promised to be
content with hunting animals.</p>

<p>But Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ found that there was no way to get down
from the rock, for it was steep and very high, so high that
it made him dizzy to look over the edge. Chunnaái told him
to wait there, for he would send someone to bring him down
safely. At last Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ saw somebody below, who proved
to be Bat.</p>

<p>"Come, help me down!" he called.</p>

<pb n="068" /><anchor id="Pg068" />

<figure url="images/image41.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Canon <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hogan</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Canon <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hogan</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Bat came up, flying round and round the rock. On his back
was a basket, supported from his shoulders by two cords that
looked like Spider's thread.</p>

<p>"That will not hold me!" exclaimed Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ.</p>

<p>"But it will," answered Bat; "it will hold the biggest
of mountain sheep!" And to prove the truth of his assertion
he filled the basket with stones and jumped up and down, and
the threads held. Then Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ was satisfied and got
in, and Bat began the descent. "Don't open your eyes!" he
commanded. After a long time, feeling that they must be near
the bottom, Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ opened his eyes, but the sight made
him dizzy, and he almost fell out of the basket. Bat became
angry at this, for the lurch almost threw him from the rock.
At last, however, they reached the ground in safety.</p>

<p>There they dragged the bodies of the two great Eagles together,
plucked them, and filled Bat's basket with the feathers,
which Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ wished to take home. "Don't go in the
low places," he advised Bat, as the latter started on ahead.
But Bat forgot, and because the walking was easier went across
the low places, where the birds stole all the feathers for their
nests; so he had to return and fill the basket again. These he
carried safely to Yólkai Ĕstsán, who gave many of them to the
people of the village.</p>

<p>From Chunnaái, Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ learned of one more monster
on the earth, a huge Rolling Stone, which lived in the south
near the pueblo of Picuris; so he and his mother went southward.
They stopped in a cañon through which Rolling Stone often passed
on its way to and from the village, and by and by it came crashing
along, destroying everything in its path. Just as it passed,
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ shot with one of his great flint-pointed arrows
and shattered it, as he had shattered the tree when Chunnaái first
gave him his weapons; and the ground in that spot is still red
from the blood that flowed from Rolling Stone's heart.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<pb n="069" /><anchor id="Pg069" />
<head>ORIGIN OF FIRE</head>

<p>Black Man, Haschí̆n Dí̆lhĭli, was created by Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ
to be his helper in the task of making the earth a good dwelling-place
for the people. Haschí̆n made the animals, mountains,
trees, and rivers, gave the people weapons and implements, and
showed how they were to be used. When all were supplied
with houses to live in and weapons with which to protect themselves
and to kill game, he called Coyote, Tsilité̆n, the Mimic.</p>

<p>"Go to the Land of the Fireflies," he commanded, "and
bring back their fire, for the people have no fire with which
to cook their food."</p>

<p>Coyote started, and found the Land of the Fireflies. These
beings lived at the bottom of a deep, deep hole—an enormous
cave in the solid rock. Its sides were smooth and straight, and
how to get down Coyote did not know. He went to the edge
of the pit, and there found growing Little Tree.</p>

<p>"Help me down to the Land of the Fireflies," he said. So
Little Tree sent its roots down, down, down, until they extended
quite to the bottom, and Coyote descended. There he played with
the little Firefly boys, romping about, running back and forth, pretending
to be thinking of nothing but their amusement, for the Fireflies
guarded their fire carefully and would let no one touch it.</p>

<p>On the tip of his tail Coyote had tied a tuft of cedar bark.
Suddenly he dashed through the great fire which always burned
in the centre of the village, and was off before the Firefly people
knew what he had done. When they discovered that he had stolen
some of their fire, they set out in pursuit; but Coyote was very
swift of foot, and reached the wall of the pit far ahead of them.</p>

<p>"Little Tree, help me out!" he called.</p>

<p>Little Tree drew its roots up, up, up, while Coyote held on
and was drawn safely out of the hole. Then he ran quickly
about among the people, lighting the piles of wood they had
prepared, until every family was supplied with fire.</p>

</div>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<pb n="071" /><anchor id="Pg071" />
<head>THE NAVAHO</head>

<p></p>

<figure url="images/image42.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>A Drink in the Desert - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: A Drink in the Desert - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<pb n="073" /><anchor id="Pg073" />
<head>HOME LIFE, ARTS, AND BELIEFS</head>

<figure url="images/image43.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Under the Cottonwoods - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Under the Cottonwoods - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The Navaho are a pastoral, semi-nomadic people whose
activities centre in their flocks and small farms. Their
reservation of more than fourteen thousand square miles
is the desert plateau region of northern Arizona and New
Mexico. Its mesas and low mountains are sparsely covered with
piñon and cedar, and on the higher levels are small but beautiful
forests of pine. Back and forth in all parts of this vast region the
Navaho drive their flocks. At the season when the slight rainfall
produces even scant pasturage on the desert plains the flocks are
pastured there; but as the grass becomes seared by the summer
sun and exhausted from pasturing, the flocks are taken into the
mountains, where the shade of the pines lends grateful coolness.
Again, as the deep snows of winter come, the sheep and goats are
driven down to the wooded mesas, where there is little snow and
an abundance of fuel, of which there is none on the plains. And
so, year in, year out, the flocks slowly drift back and forth from
plain to mesa and from mesa to mountain.</p>

<p>While the Navaho leads a wandering life, the zone of his
movements is surprisingly limited; indeed the average Navaho's
personal knowledge of his country is confined to a radius of not
more than fifty miles. The family usually has three homes, the
situation of which is determined by the necessities of life. Near
their summer home they cultivate small crops of corn and vegetables
in narrow, sandy washes, where by deep planting sufficient
moisture is insured to mature the crop. In a few sections small
farming is conducted by means of irrigation. In Cañon de Chelly,
which may be termed the garden spot of the reservation, there are
diminutive farms and splendid peach orchards irrigated with freshet
water. The cañon drains an extensive region, and even a light<pb n="074" /><anchor id="Pg074" />
rain causes the stream which flows at the base of its lofty walls to
become swollen. This water the natives divert to their miniature
cornfields and orchards, one or two freshets assuring good crops.</p>

<figure url="images/image44.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Cornfields in Canon Del Muerto - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Cornfields in Canon Del Muerto - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Owing to its lowness and its earth covering, the Navaho
house, or <hi rend="font-style: italic">hogán</hi>, is the most inconspicuous of habitations. One
might ride from morning till night across the reservation and not
observe either a hogán or an Indian, although he has no doubt
passed within a stone's throw of many of these houses and been
peered at by many more dark eyes from brush concealments.
At the end of a long day in the saddle the traveller may wonder
where the many thousands of Navaho reside; but his inquiry may
be answered if he will but climb to the summit of one of the
many low mountains and view the panorama as the long shadows
of evening are creeping on. Here and there in every direction
the thin blue smoke of the campfire may be seen curling upward
as these desert people prepare their evening meal. In this clear,
rare atmosphere the far distant horizon is the only limit to his
vision. Just below, a mile or so away, may perhaps be seen the
smoke from a group of half a dozen hogáns. Miles beyond is
another group, and still beyond another, and so throughout the
sweep of vision. These people and their life are delightfully
Indian, but slightly influenced by the white man's ways. As the
chief human touch of the great southwestern desert the Navaho
are the artist's joy, and as a subject for the ethnologist their ceremonial
life furnishes limitless material for study.</p>

<p>The handicraft of the Navaho is seen at its best in their
blanketry, which is one of the most important industries of any
Indians within our domain. The greater portion of the wool
from their hundreds of thousands of sheep is used in weaving,
and in addition a considerable quantity of commercial yarn is
employed for the same purpose. The origin of the textile
art among the Navaho is an open question. It is probable that
they did not learn it from anyone, but that it developed as a part
of their domestic culture. It is contended by some that the early
Spanish missionaries taught the Navaho to weave; but why should
the white man be accredited with this art? The mummies<pb n="075" /><anchor id="Pg075" />
found in the prehistoric cliff-ruins of the Navaho country are
wrapped in cloth finer than any ever produced with a Navaho
loom, and no doubt now remains that Pueblo people were
incorporated by the Navaho in ancient times.</p>

<p>The blankets made in earlier days, say from fifty to a
hundred and fifty years ago, are beautiful examples of primitive
handicraft. The body of a so-called bayeta blanket was woven of
close-spun native wool, dyed dark blue, while the red pattern was
from the ravellings of Spanish bayeta. Much of the beauty of
the old blankets is due to the mellowing of the native colors by
age, but practically none of these rare examples are to be found
among the Navaho at the present time. The blankets of to-day
may be roughly divided into three classes: 1. Those made from
the close-spun native yarn dyed in the old colors and woven in
the simple old patterns; when aged they closely resemble the old
bayeta blankets. 2. Blankets woven in a great variety of designs
from coarse, loose-spun yarn dyed with commercial dyes of many
shades; these are the Navaho blankets of commerce. 3. Those
woven from commercial or "Germantown" yarn; they are of
fine texture and sometimes beautiful, but lack interest in that
their material is not of Indian production. Fortunately the
decrease in the demand for blankets woven of commercial yarn
is discouraging their manufacture.</p>

<p>The Navaho woman weaves her blanket not so much for
profit as for love of the work. It is her recreation, her means
of expressing imagination and her skill in execution. Civilized
women may write books, paint pictures, or deliver ringing addresses;
these are unknown worlds to the Navaho woman: but
when after months of labor she finishes a blanket, her pride in
her work of art is indeed well justified.</p>

<p>Because of their pastoral life the Navaho are not villagers.
Their dome-shaped, earth-covered hogáns are usually grouped
two or three in the same locality. The summer house is a rude
brush shelter, usually made with four corner posts, a flat top of
brush, and a windbreak of the same material as a protection against
the hot desert siroccos. The hogán proper, used for storage<pb n="076" /><anchor id="Pg076" />
during the summer, affords a warm and comfortable shelter to its
occupants through the cold winters of their high altitude. When
a hogán is built it is ceremonially consecrated, and if an occupant
should die in it, it is forever deserted and is called <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsí̆ndi hogán</hi>,
"evil house." No Navaho will go near such a house or touch
anything taken from it. If a meal were cooked with decayed
wood from a hogán a hundred years deserted, a Navaho, even if
starving, could not be induced to partake of it. Thus strong
are the religious beliefs of this primitive people.</p>

<figure url="images/image45.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Blanket Maker - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: The Blanket Maker - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The domestic equipment of the Navaho is simplicity itself
and reflects the simple life of the tribe. Of household furniture
there is none. The bedding consists usually of a few sheepskins;
cooking utensils are earthen pots of their own making, and cups,
knives, and spoons of civilization. Plates they do not need,
as the family eat directly from the pot in which the food is
cooked. The principal food is mutton, boiled, and corn prepared
in many ways. Considerable flour obtained from traders is consumed;
this is leavened slightly and made into small cakes, which
are cooked over the embers like Mexican tortillas.</p>

<p>The women are an important factor in the Navaho tribe. The
sheep usually, and the house, with all that pertains to it, always
are the property of the wife. The independent spirit of the
women, instilled by this incontestable property right, manifests
itself throughout the tribe, and by reason of it the Navaho husband
is not apt to seek an opportunity to criticise his wife so long
as she is in a position to say, "If I and the hogán do not suit you,
go elsewhere!" Polygamy is common, but as a rule the wives
of one man are sisters, an arrangement conducive to domestic
harmony.</p>

<p>Many of the Navaho men are skilled silversmiths. Every
well-to-do Navaho possesses a silver belt consisting of a dozen or
more wrought oval discs, each about two by three inches, fastened
to a leather strap. Such a belt, weighing several pounds,
is of course a valuable piece of property. The wearer may also
have a broad silver bracelet set with turquoise, a heavy string of
silver beads with a massive pendant of the same material, and a<pb n="077" /><anchor id="Pg077" />
pair of deerskin leggings with a row of silver buttons on the outer
side. Frequently their horses are gaily bedecked with bridles and
saddles heavily weighted with silver ornaments. The long strap
over the shoulder, from which the pouch of the medicine-man
is suspended, is always studded with silver buttons. Mexican
coins, especially the peso, are the principal source of all this silverwork,
the Navaho preferring this coin to our own dollar because
it is heavier. Buttons and beads also are made from American
dimes and twenty-five cent pieces; the small beads from dimes,
and the larger ones from two coins of the same value. They
learned silversmithing from the Mexicans, but since their first
lessons have developed a high degree of individuality in the
art. While the metal-work of the Navaho at the present time is
practically all in silver, only a few copper objects being made,
their earliest work in metal was with iron, and occasionally an
example of this is found. The silver and shell bead jewelry
of the Navaho is his savings bank. During times of prosperity
he becomes the possessor of all the jewelry his means afford, and
when poor crops or long winters threaten distress he pawns it at a
trader's, so that many of the traders often have thousands of dollars'
worth of silverwork and shell beads on hand at one time. The
system seems to be a very fair one, and in time of stress is certainly
a boon to the impecunious Navaho.</p>

<p>The little pottery made by this people is an undecorated ware
for utilitarian purposes only. For carrying water a gum-coated
water bottle of basketry is in general use. Few baskets are made,
and these are of but a single pattern—a flattish tray for use in
ceremonies. Most of the baskets used by the Navaho in their
ceremonies, however, are purchased from neighboring tribes, especially
the Havasupai and the Paiute, who weave them primarily
for purposes of trade. Such baskets must be of a prescribed pattern,
with a break in the design at one side. When the basket is
in use this side is always placed toward the east.</p>

<p>Most Navaho ceremonies are conducted, at least primarily,
for the purpose of healing disease; and while designated medicine
ceremonies, they are, in fact, ritualistic prayers. There are<pb n="078" /><anchor id="Pg078" />
so many of these ceremonies that no student has yet determined
their number, which reaches into scores, while the component
ritual prayers of some number hundreds. The principal
ceremonies are those that require nine days and nine nights in
their performance. Of the many now known the names of nine
are here given: Kléjĕ Hatál, Night Chant;<note place="foot"><p>The myth and ritual of this ceremony are given on pages 111-116.</p></note> Tzĭlhkí̆chĭ Hatál,
Mountain Chant; Hozhónĭ Hatál, Happiness Chant; Natói Hatál,
Shooting Chant; Toi Hatál, Water Chant; Atsósĭ Hatál, Feather
Chant; Yoi Hatál, Bead Chant; Hochónchĭ Hatál, Evil-Spirit
Chant; Mai Hatál, Coyote Chant. Each is based on a mythic
story, and each has four dry-paintings, or so-called altars. Besides
these nine days' ceremonies there are others whose performance
requires four days, and many simpler ones requiring only a single
day, each with its own dry-painting.</p>

<figure url="images/image46.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pĭké̆hodĭklad</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>This, the first of the dry-paintings employed in the rites of the Mountain Chant—a
nine days' healing ceremony of the Navaho—as in the Night Chant, is used on the fifth night,
when the purpose of the performance is to frighten the patient, and thus banish the evil within
him. The name of this painting, "Frighten Him On It," is identical with that of the one
used at the corresponding moment in the Night Chant.</p>

<p>The whole represents the den of a hibernating bear. Inside the ceremonial hogán is thrown
up a bank of earth two or three feet high, with an opening toward the doorway. Colored
earths picture bear-tracks leading in; bear-tracks and sunlight—sun dogs—are represented at
the four quarters, and the bear himself, streaked with sunlight, in the centre. The twigs at the
entrance of the bear den represent trees, behind which bears are wont to dig their dens in
the mountain side. Everything tends to make the patient think of bears. He enters midst
deep silence and takes his seat upon the pictured animal. The play of his imagination has
barely begun when a man, painted and garbed as a bear, rushes in, uttering hideous snarls and
growls, in which all assembled join. Women patients seldom fail to faint.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Pĭké̆hodĭklad</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The figures shown in the dry-paintings are conventionalized
representations of the characters in Navaho mythology and
of incidents in the myth. With how many such paintings the
Navaho medicine-men are familiar is an unanswered question;
but more than sixty have been noted, some of them most elaborate.
In making them, the ground within the ceremonial hogán
is evenly covered with fine brown earth, upon which the figures
are drawn with fine sands and earths of many colors allowed to
flow between the thumb and the first two fingers. The Navaho
become so skilled in this work that they can draw a line as fine
as a broad pencil mark. Many of the paintings are comparatively
small, perhaps not more than four feet in diameter; others are
as large as the hogán permits, sometimes twenty-four feet across.
To make such a large painting requires the assistance of all the
men who can conveniently work at it from early morning until
mid-afternoon.</p>

<p>The most elaborate ceremonies are conducted between the
first frost of autumn and the second moon following the winter
solstice. While primarily designed to restore the health of an
individual, they are intended also to benefit the entire tribe,
many of the prayers being offered for the general welfare of the<pb n="079" /><anchor id="Pg079" />
people rather than for the patient under immediate treatment.
Nor, so far as the individual is concerned, is the ceremony designed
necessarily for the cure of an acute ailment, but is for the
treatment of long-standing chronic afflictions, mental or physical.
Especially peculiar is the Navaho belief that many illnesses are
the results of fright to which ancestors have been subjected during
prenatal life, and long and costly ceremonies are often performed
to rid persons of such baneful inheritance. In fact Indians
physically normal have submitted to prolonged treatment by
their medicine-men when advised by them for such imaginative
reasons to submit to it.</p>

<p>The medicine-men, who are termed singers, <hi rend="font-style: italic">hatálĭ</hi>, are a
dominant factor in the Navaho life. Like all primitive people,
the Navaho are intensely religious, and the medicine-men, whose
function it is to become versed in the mysteries of religion, are
ever prone to cultivate in the minds of the people the belief that
they are powerful not only in curing disease of mind and body
but of preventing it by their incantations. Anyone who possesses
the requisite ability may become a medicine-man, but owing to
the elaborate ceremonies connected with their practices it requires
long years of application ere one can attain sufficient knowledge
to give him standing among his tribesmen. To completely
master the intricacies of any one of the many nine days' ceremonies
requires close application during the major portion of a man's
lifetime. The only way a novice has of learning is by assisting<pb n="080" /><anchor id="Pg080" />
the elders in the performance of the rites, and as there is little
probability that opportunity will be afforded him to participate
in more than two or three ceremonies in a year, his instruction
is necessarily slow. The medicine-men recognize the fact that
their ritual has been decadent for some time, and they regard it
as foreordained that when all the ceremonies are forgotten the
world will cease to exist.</p>

<figure url="images/image47.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hástĭn Yázhĕ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hástĭn Yázhĕ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The most pronounced dread manifested by the Navaho is that
derived from their belief respecting the spirits of the dead. It is
thought that the spirit leaves the body at death and travels to a
place toward the north where there is a pit whence the gods and
the animals emerged from an underworld before the first Navaho
were created, and which the dead now enter. Their myths tell
of the disappearance of a beautiful daughter of one of the animal
chiefs on the fourth day after the gods and the animals came up
into this world; diligent search was unrewarded until two of the
searchers looked down through the hole and espied her sitting
beside a stream in the lower world combing her hair. Four days
later death came to these searchers, so that now the Navaho will
go to any extreme to avoid coming into contact with spirits of
the dead, <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsí̆ndi</hi>, which they believe travel anywhere and everywhere
at will, often doing evil, but never good. The body
is prepared for burial previous to death, and is never touched
afterward if it can be avoided.</p>

<p>To the end that the spirit may begin aright its journey to
the afterworld, the body is taken out of the hogán through
an opening specially made in the wall on the northern side, for
the doorway always faces the east. The immediate relatives of the
deceased avoid looking at the corpse if possible. Friends of the
family or distant relations usually take charge of the burial. A
couple of men dig a grave on a hillside and carry the body there
wrapped in blankets. No monument is erected to mark the
spot. Before the body is taken out, the hogán is vacated and all
necessary utensils are carried away. The two men who bury the
remains of the former occupant carefully obliterate with a cedar
bough all footprints that the relations of the deceased may have<pb n="081" /><anchor id="Pg081" />
made in the hogán, in order to conceal from the departed spirit
the direction in which they went should it return to do them
harm. The premises are completely abandoned and the house
often burned. Never will a Navaho occupy a <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsí̆ndi hogán</hi>, and
when travelling at night he will take a roundabout trail in order
to avoid one. Formerly horses were killed at the grave. So
recently as 1906 a horse was sacrificed within sight of a Catholic
mission on the reservation, that its spirit might accompany that
of a dead woman to the afterworld. This horse was the property
of the woman, and her husband, fearing to retain it, yet not daring
to kill it himself, called upon another to do so.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>HISTORY</head>

<p>Although raiders and plunderers since known to history,
the Navaho cannot be designated a warring tribe, for however
courageous they may be, their lack of political integrity
has ever been an obstacle to military organization. They never
have had a tribal chief, properly so called, while their many
leading men could never command more than a small following.
Manuelito, who was acclaimed head-chief in 1855 at the conference
with Governor Meriwether for the purpose of negotiating
a treaty, probably had a greater following than any other Navaho
in historic times, but he could never have relied on a majority of
the warriors of his widely scattered tribe. Although divided into
many bands, like the Apache, the Navaho, unlike them, were not
engaged in ceaseless depredation, their sporadic raids having been
conducted by small parties quite independent of any organized
tribal movement. They preferred rather to follow a pastoral life.
With their large population, had they possessed the Apache's
insatiable desire for war and a political organization that permitted
concerted action, the subjugation of the Southwest would have
been far more difficult than it proved to be.</p>

<p>While the statement is made that the Navaho were never a
warlike people, it must not be presumed that they never caused
our Government trouble. Those familiar with the Navaho<pb n="082" /><anchor id="Pg082" />
admire their energy, industry, independence, and cheerful disposition,
and their ability to attack the problems of life in a way
that no other wandering tribe has exercised. On the other
hand, cunning and trickery are among their characteristics, and
they are expert horse-thieves. With the Indian, as well as with
civilized man, honesty may be interpreted in various ways. If
one should leave his camp equipage unprotected in a tent, it would
be entirely safe from all except the renegade, already recognized
by his people as a thief. But if one should turn his back and
later find that his horse had been run off by a Navaho in the hope
of being rewarded for returning it, the tribesmen of the raider
would regard him as one whose cunning should be emulated.</p>

<figure url="images/image48.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Navaho <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hogan</hi></head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Navaho <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hogan</hi></figDesc>
</figure>

<p>For a long period prior to the acquisition from Mexico of
the territory now forming the northern portion of Arizona and
New Mexico, which, since first known, has been occupied in part
by the Navaho, the tribe had been in the habit of making raids
on the New Mexican Indian pueblos and the white settlements
along the Rio Grande, chiefly for the capture of livestock,
although both Indians and Mexicans also were taken and enslaved.
The Mexicans lost no opportunity to retaliate, with the result that
scattered throughout their villages in the valley of the Rio Grande
there were more captives of Navaho blood than there were
Mexican prisoners among the Navaho tribe; but in the matter of
sheep, cattle, and horses, the Navaho were far ahead in the game
of thievery, and even boasted that they could easily have exterminated
the Mexicans had they not needed them as herders of their
stolen flocks. In consequence, bitter enmity early arose between
the Mexicans and the Navaho, which reached its height about
the time Col. Stephen W. Kearny took possession of the territory
in behalf of the United States in 1846.</p>

<p>In the year named a military expedition was sent into the
Navaho country for the purpose of making a treaty of peace and
friendship with this marauding tribe; but this treaty, like several
others that followed, was soon broken, and the raids continued as
before. In 1858 the troubles arising from the plunderings became
especially severe and led to several other expeditions, but with<pb n="083" /><anchor id="Pg083" />
little result. The problem became a serious one in 1861, when
the Civil War necessitated the withdrawal of troops from the
frontier, leaving the way open to the devastation of the country
by the Navaho and Mescaleros, until General Carleton, who
assumed command of the military forces in New Mexico in 1862,
formulated a policy to thoroughly subdue the Navaho and to
transfer them to the Bosque Redondo, on the Rio Pecos in New
Mexico, where Fort Sumner had been established, and there hold
them as prisoners of war until some other plan could be devised.
His plan was successfully carried out. By the spring of 1863 four
hundred Mescaleros were under guard on the new reservation, and
by the close of that year about two hundred Navaho prisoners
had either been transferred thither or were on the way. Early in
1864 Col. Kit Carson led his volunteers to the Cañon de Chelly,
the Navaho stronghold, where in a fight he succeeded in killing
twenty-three, capturing thirty-four, and compelling two hundred
to surrender. The backbone of the hostility was now broken,
and before the beginning of 1865 about seven thousand, later
increased to 8491, were under military control within the new
reservation. But the Bosque Redondo proved unhealthful and
disappointing as a reservation, while its maintenance was costly to
the Government. A treaty was therefore made with the Navaho
in 1868, one of the provisions of which was the purchase of fifteen
thousand sheep to replenish their exterminated flocks. In July
7304 Navaho, the remainder having died or escaped, arrived at
Fort Wingate on the way to their old home, where they have
since lived in peace and prosperity.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MYTHOLOGY - CREATION MYTH</head>

<p>In the world below<note place="foot"><p>Versions differ as to the number of worlds through which the progenitors of the Navaho
passed. Some give three before this one, others but one. The version adopted by the Bahozhonchí,
a religious order or medicine society whose rites and ceremonies are the oldest and most
widely known of any in the tribe, treats of two worlds only: the one below, from which the
Dĭgí̆n, or Holy People, migrated in the form of insects, birds, and beasts, and to which the dead
return; and the present, into which was born man in his present image, created of pollen, corn,
white shell, turquoise, and rain by the Dĭgí̆n. These Dĭgí̆n were the animals which never
assumed absolute material form on this earth, and the gods who perfected the creation.
The creation of the world below, together with all food products, plant life, and animals
known to the Navaho, is credited to First Man and First Woman, Ástsĕ Hástĭn and Ástsĕ
Ĕstsán; but the myth does not go back to that creation, nor, save for the plant and animal life
and a little earth used in making mountains, does it assume the use of any part of the underworld
in the making or completion of this. So far as the inhabitants now found in the image
of man are concerned, they were made, and first existed, on this earth, and did not develop
from a lower order.</p></note> there was no sun and no moon, and
therefore no light, yet vegetation in innumerable forms and<pb n="084" /><anchor id="Pg084" />
the animal people thrived. Among the latter were Gray Wolf
people, Naklétso; Mountain Lion, Nashtuítso; Badger, Naaschí̆d;
Locust, Wónĕschĭdĭ; Pine Squirrel, Klozĕslskái and Klozĕslzhí̆nĭ;
Blue Fox, Mai-Dotlí̆shĭ; Yellow Fox, Mai-Iltsói; Owl, Náscha;
Crow, Gấgĕ; Buzzard, Jésho; four different varieties of the
Hawk people, and many others.</p>

<figure url="images/image49.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Navaho Still Life</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Navaho Still Life</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Their world was small. At its eastern rim stood a large
white mountain, and at the south a blue one. These formed the
home of Ástsĕ Hástĭn, First Man. A yellow mountain in the
west and a black one in the north harbored Ástsĕ Ĕstsán, First
Woman.<note place="foot"><p>The Navaho sometimes vary the assignment of their directional colors by relating, like
the Apache of Arizona, black to the east and white to the north.</p></note> Near the mountain in the east a large river had its
source and flowed toward the south. Along its western bank
the people lived in peace and plenty. There was game in abundance,
much corn, and many edible fruits and nuts. All were
happy. The younger women ground corn while the boys sang
songs and played on flutes of the sunflower stalk. The men and
the women had each eight chiefs, four living toward each cardinal
point; the chiefs of the men lived in the east and south, those
of the women in the west and north. The chiefs of the east
took precedence over those of the south, as did those of the west
over those of the north.</p>

<p>One day, led by their eight brave chiefs, all the men went
off on a hunt. It occurred to the head-chief when they had
been gone but a short time that the women should have been
instructed to clean the camp thoroughly and bake a quantity
of bread while all the men were away; so he despatched the
youngest of the four chiefs of the south to the camp to make<pb n="085" /><anchor id="Pg085" />
known his wishes, but instead of doing as bidden, the young
chief visited with the head-chief's wife. The hunters were gone
four days, at the end of which time they returned with much
game, weary and very hungry. To their surprise they found the
camp in a very unkempt condition and no bread baked in anticipation
of their return. The messenger was called before the head-chief
at once and questioned as to the directions he had given the
women. He explained that he had told the chief of the women
what they were expected to do, but she refused to listen to him,
and he was powerless to do more. Then the head-chief went
to his wife and demanded to know why she had refused to issue
his orders to the women. She curtly replied that that was her
business and not his; as it was, the women did more work than
the men, for they tilled the fields, made the clothing, cared for
the children, and did the cooking, while the men did practically
nothing, so if they chose to spend a few days in idleness, it was
nothing more than they had a right to do and no one's concern
but their own. The chief became angry, and during a
quarrel that ensued he was told that he and all his followers
might leave if they would, for the women could get along better
without them.</p>

<p>Remonstrance and reasoning availed nothing; the chief of
the women grew more vehement as she argued, so the head-chief
determined to put the women to the test. The following morning
he issued orders that all the men in camp prepare to depart,
for the women had declared they could live better independently
of them and were to be given an opportunity to do so.</p>

<p>Having decided to cross the great river flowing from the east,
work at once began on four large cottonwood rafts to be used as
ferries. Four days it took to put all in readiness, and at dawn
of the fifth day the crossing of the stream began. Orders were
issued that all food supplies, clothing, and utensils be left with
the women, save enough seed corn to plant crops the next spring,
and no males, infant or aged, were to be left behind. Four
<hi rend="font-style: italic">nú̆tlĭ</hi> (hermaphrodites) objected strongly at being taken from the
women, but were forced to join the men, as they were needed<pb n="086" /><anchor id="Pg086" />
to care for the babies. Four old cripples, too weak to move,
were left behind, but other than these not a male inhabitant
remained in the old village at the end of four days. After all
had crossed the river, the rafts were fastened securely to the bank
in order that the women might not get them and follow.</p>

<figure url="images/image50.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Navaho Medicine-man</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Navaho Medicine-man</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>As soon as the men had landed they began to work with zeal,
for houses had to be built, game caught, skins tanned, and land
prepared for crops. They suffered much from scarcity of food
and clothing the first winter, but managed to exist. The women,
however, had bountiful crops, and all through the late fall and
winter could be heard revelling in great delight, feasting daily
and dancing much of the time to the music of songs sung by the
four old cripples. The following autumn found the men in
much better circumstances, for they had grown small crops; but
the women were less fortunate. Having none but themselves
to work and provide for, they had become negligent from the
beginning, dissipating the contents of their granaries and allowing
their fields to grow fallow. By the end of the second year
clothing had become very scarce, and not knowing how to hunt,
they had no way to obtain more skins. The men, on the contrary,
had grown more prosperous; their well-tended farms yielded
an ample supply of corn for the winter, and the pelts of deer and
antelope furnished a deal of warm clothing and bedding. The
third year found the men living in ease and comfort, while the
women had become reduced to absolute want, many having
fallen ill from self-neglect. They called across to the men,
pleading to be taken over and promising faithful allegiance,
but the chief was resolute and refused to forget how he had
been wronged.</p>

<p>Then it was that the youngest of the eight ruling men, in a
moment of compassion, confessed his guilt, admitting in a plea
to the head-chief for clemency that he was in fact responsible
for the attitude his wife had taken. This served only to renew
the old chief's anger; he stoutly refused to listen to further
appeals and expressed his regret that the first seeds of wrong
should have been thus sown. No longer able to keep up the fight,<pb n="087" /><anchor id="Pg087" />
with starvation staring them in the face, and being in nakedness,
at the end of the fourth year the women attempted to swim the
river in parties, but the attempts resulted only in death, for the
swift current would have been too much even for the strongest
men to buffet. Seeing this self-sacrifice and realizing that the
race would be ultimately exterminated if the women continued
it much longer, appeals were made daily to the head-chief to permit
the rescue of the remainder. Four times was he sought to
grant such permission before he consented, then at dawn of the
fifth morning he gave directions to loose the rafts and ferry the
women over. A miserable remnant they were, unclad, wan,
and wasted; but a return to the old habits of life soon restored
them to their former selves, and peace, happiness, and prosperity
reigned again.</p>

<p>The broad river that flowed from the east had its source in
two very large springs, a he-spring and a she-spring, in which
lived two large Water Monsters. These had a pair of youngsters
who delighted in emerging from the depths of the spring and
swimming out across the meadows in the shallow water where
there was neither current nor river banks. Coyote spied them
one day, and being ever a meddler and trouble-maker—though
withal a fellow of polished mien—stole them, putting the two
under the folds of his jacket.</p>

<p>Now there was no sun, moon, or stars to give light; but in
the east every morning appeared White Dawn four fingers high.
The midday was lighted by Blue Dawn in the south, and late
afternoon by Yellow Dawn from the west. The north remained
always dark. On the morning following Coyote's return from his
trip to the east, ostensibly to discover, if possible, the source of
the dawn, the head-chief noticed that it was not so broad
as usual—only three fingers high, with a dark streak beneath.
A Wolf man was sent to learn what was wrong. He hurried
off, returning at nightfall with the report that all was well in the
east. The next morning White Dawn was much narrower and
the darkness beneath had increased. A Mountain Lion messenger
was despatched to seek the cause. He reported everything<pb n="088" /><anchor id="Pg088" />
in normal condition, but those in camp noticed deer in the distance
travelling westward at a rapid pace. The third morning
the belt of darkness was wider than White Dawn, which now
gave an alarmingly dim light. The chief then sent White Hawk
to investigate the trouble, under orders of haste. His report, like
that of each of the other messengers, was that nothing unusual
appeared in the east. More deer, antelope, and other game animals,
however, were seen running westward in apparent fright.</p>

<figure url="images/image51.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Through the Canon - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Through the Canon - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>On the fourth morning White Dawn was entirely obscured;
nothing but darkness appeared in the east. Sparrow-hawk sped
away, returning in a very brief time with the report that water
was fast rising in the two springs at the head of the river and
might soon spread westward in a great devastating wave. Instantly
the camp became a scene of commotion. Quickly gathering
together what corn and other seeds they could carry, the people
started in haste for the White Mountain in the east. On
reaching the top they saw the waters climbing rapidly up the
eastern slope, so they descended and ran to the Blue Mountain
in the south, taking with them handfuls of earth from its crest,
and from its base a reed with twelve sections, which a Wolf man
carried.</p>

<p>From the top of the Blue Mountain it was seen that the
wave of water, fast approaching, would submerge them, so snatching
handfuls of earth from it they hurried on to the Yellow
Mountain in the west. The oncoming wave seemed higher than
ever, so again they ran on, this time toward the north, where the
Black Mountain stood, taking as before handfuls of earth and
another reed, entrusted to Mountain Lion. Here the water surrounded
them and slowly crept up the sides of the mountain.
The female reed from the west was planted on the western side
near the top, the male reed from the east on the eastern slope, and
both at once began to shoot upward rapidly. Into the twelve
internodes of the female reed climbed all the women, while the
men made haste to get into theirs. Turkey being the last to get
in, the foamy waters caught his tail, whitening the tips of the
feathers, which are so to this day.</p>

<pb n="089" /><anchor id="Pg089" />

<p>The reeds grew very rapidly, but equally fast rose the waters
around them. Four days the reeds grew thus, at the end of the
fourth day meeting at the sky. This seemed an impenetrable
barrier for a time, but Locust had taken with him his bow of
darkness and sacred arrows. With these he made a hole in the
sky and passed on into the world above—the present earth.</p>

<p>The earth was small, devoid of vegetation of any kind, and
covered in greater part by water in which lived four Monsters
with great blue horns. These had their homes at the cardinal
points, and just as soon as Locust made his appearance arrows
came whizzing at him from all quarters. Failing to harm him
with their arrows, which he dodged with ease, the Monsters bade
him leave at once, threatening immediate death if he tarried;
adding that visitors were not desired and were always destroyed
at sight.</p>

<p>Locust replied that he intended no harm, but would insist
upon remaining with them for a time, for he had many followers
for whom he was seeking a home. Seeing that Locust had no
fear of them and had proved too agile to be hit with arrows,
the Monsters sought to kill him by trickery. Each took two
heavy arrows, swallowed them, and pulled them out through their
flanks, saying, "Do this and you may remain." Locust followed
their example, escaping unharmed.</p>

<p>"Now," said he, "I did your trick, let me ask you to do one
of mine." Then taking four sacred arrows he passed them
transversely through his chest, back and forth, one at a time. As
he pulled each arrow out the second time he passed it to one of
the four Monsters, saying, "If you can do this, my people will not
come; if not, then I shall send for them and we shall all make
this our home." Each placed an arrow to his chest and pushed,
but cringed with pain as soon as it penetrated the skin. Fearing
the Monsters might not proceed, Locust quickly blew toward each
of the arrows, which shot through their bodies, instantly killing
them. In the east now flows Red river, made red by the blood
of these Monsters; and holes yet remain through the thorax of
the locust.</p>

<pb n="090" /><anchor id="Pg090" />

<p>Impatient at the delay in Locust's return, Badger climbed
through the hole in the sky and followed the tracks to where
Locust had been in controversy with the slain Monsters. Seeing
their bodies lying out in the shallow water, he thought he would
go over and inspect them, but he sank into the soft black mud,
which made him retreat. The mud blackened his legs, which
have remained the same to this day.</p>

<figure url="images/image52.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Evening in the Desert - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Evening in the Desert - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>With a large stone knife Locust cut off the horns of the
Monsters one by one. With those from the one toward the east
he made a long sweep with his arm in that direction, and in the
distance sprang up an ocean. In like manner he formed oceans
to the south, west, and north with the horns of the remaining
three. The creation of rivers followed: with a wave of the hand
the Rio Grande, the San Juan, the Colorado, the Little Colorado,
and others were made. Hair pulled from the bodies of the Monsters
was tossed to the winds and from it sprang frogs, snakes,
lizards, and reptiles of every kind.</p>

<p>While Locust was doing this the remainder of the people
came up. They stood about on the small bare spots of ground
wondering what to do. Among them were the four Winds
(Ní̆lchi), Black, Blue, Yellow, and White. Each blew toward
his respective cardinal point and soon much of the water dried up,
leaving a quantity of bare land. But not a sign of vegetation was
there at any hand; all was as barren as the desert sands. Luckily
each had brought seeds of many kinds from the world below.
These they began planting, finishing the task in four days.</p>

<p>After the planting, First Man, First Woman, Wolf Chief, and
Mountain Lion Chief each made a speech advising the creation
of a number of mountains similar to the ones they had had in the
lower world. This was agreeable to all, and accordingly the work
was begun. The handfuls of earth caught up hurriedly from the
tops of the mountains below as they were driven off by the
rising flood were taken to the cardinal points and deposited in
the same relative positions, an equal distance apart, as were the submerged
mountains from which the earth had been taken. First
Sí̆snajĭnĭ, the White Mountain, was<pb n="091" /><anchor id="Pg091" />
made in the east; then Tsótzĭlh, the Blue Mountain, in the
south; next Dokóöslit, the Yellow Mountain, in the west, and lastly
Dĕpé̆nsa, the Black Mountain, in the north. Having yet portions of each handful of earth remaining,
two more mountains, called Chóĭli and Tzĭlhnúhodĭhlĭ, were
made near the point of emergence in the middle of the rectangle
formed by the creation of the other four. To give each mountain
color, white shell, turquoise, abalone, and jet were used
for those at the cardinal points, while the middle two were
colored with a mixture of all these substances.</p>

<p>When the mountains were finished and the people looked about,
it was proposed that a sky should be made to cover the earth.
"But," said one, "what of the earth itself; is it not too small to
furnish food for the people who shall later come to live upon it?"
None had thought of this, but reflection, followed by a discussion,
brought them all to the one opinion—they would enlarge the
earth and at the same time spread the sky above. Accordingly,
the chief who had spoken asked if anyone had a piece of turquoise
weighing as much as a man, and the skin of a large male deer
which had been smothered to death in pollen. First Man
answered that he had. A large white shell and the skin of a doe
which had been smothered in pollen were next requested. First
Woman responded with them. The two skins were then placed
on the ground, side by side, with their heads toward the east.
Upon the one was put the turquoise and a piece of abalone
shell; on the other the white shell and a pearl. First Man
and First Woman then called for Kósdĭlhkĭh, Black Cloud, and
Ádĭlhkĭh, Black Fog. These came and spread out over the skins
four times each, lifting and settling each time. When Fog lifted
the last time it took up with it the skin with the turquoise and
abalone and began to expand, spreading wider and wider until a
blue film covered all, in the form of the sky. As the turquoise
skin expanded, so also did the white-shell skin, broadening the
earth as it grew. During this period of transition the people all
travelled eastward, and being Holy People, covered great distances<pb n="092" /><anchor id="Pg092" />
each day. At the end of the fourth day they stopped. Then also
the sky and the earth ceased widening, having reached their present
dimensions. Since the two skins had been placed with their heads
toward the east, the heads of the sky and the earth are now in
that direction.</p>

<figure url="images/image53.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>This, the Talking God, is the chief character in Navaho mythology. In the rites
in which personated deities minister to a suffering patient this character invariably leads,
carrying a four-piece folding wand, <hi rend="font-style: italic">balíl</hi>, and uttering a peculiar cry.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>As yet there was neither sun nor moon to shed light, only
dawn, circling the horizon in the four colors—white in the east,
blue in the south, yellow in the west, and black in the north.
Deeming it necessary that they should have light to brighten the
world, and warmth for the corn and the grass, on their return
to the earth's centre one of the chiefs made a speech advocating
the creation of a sun and a moon.</p>

<p>First Man and First Woman placed two sacred deerskins on
the ground as before. On the buckskin a shell of abalone was
placed, on the doeskin a bowl made of pearl. The shell contained
a piece of clear quartz crystal, and the bowl a moss agate. The
objects were dressed respectively in garments of white, blue,
yellow, and black wind, and were carried to the end of the land
in the east by First Man and First Woman. With their spirit
power Ástsĕ Hástĭn and Ástsĕ Ĕstsán sent both the shell and the
bowl far out over the ocean, giving life to the crystal and the
agate as they did so, directing that the one who would be known
as Chĕhonaái, the Sun, should journey homeward through the
sky by day, shedding light and warmth as he passed; the other,
Klĕhonaái, the Moon, must travel the same course by night. To
each were given homes of turquoise in the east and west, and
none but the Winds and the gods, Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschógan,
were to visit them.</p>

<p>Upon their return Ástsĕ Hástĭn and Ástsĕ Ĕstsán were asked
if they would leave the sky in so plain a condition, or if they
intended to beautify it with jewels. They replied that it was
their intention to dot it with many bright stars. All those who
had bits of white shell, turquoise, crystal, pearl, or abalone were
directed to contribute them for the making of the stars. These
were placed upon the two deerskins by First Man and First
Woman. The seven stars of the Great Dipper, Nôhokos Bakú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,<pb n="093" /><anchor id="Pg093" />
were the first to be set in the sky. Next, those of Nóhokos
Baád, his female complement, were placed in the blue dome.
Then followed Ĕté̆tso and Ĕtĕtsózĭ, Sóntso and Sontsózĭ, and
Dílgĕhĕt, the Small Dipper, Sonhótsĭ and Klĕkái Stáĭ, the
Milky Way.</p>

<p>In each instance the arrangement of the stars in the constellation
was made when the fragments of precious stones were placed
upon the skins, where Ástsĕ Hástĭn and Ástsĕ Ĕstsán imparted
glowing light to them and delivered them to the Winds to carry
to the sky. Only a small portion of the gems had been thus
transformed and sent up, when a fine-looking, well-dressed stranger
came up to watch the proceedings. In reply to his question as
to what was being done, his attention was directed to the sun,
the moon, and the many stars already created, while more were
soon to follow. The man was Coyote, son of Darkness. He
watched the work for a time, when, seeing his chance, he caught
the large deerskin containing the pile of jewel fragments and
flung it skyward, blowing into the bits four times ere they could
fall, scattering them all over the sky. Thus it is that there are
myriads of stars irregular in arrangement and without names.
As he strode off Coyote explained curtly that there were already
enough sacred things to worship.</p>

<p>Then the Winds were stationed at the horizon to guard the
earth, and at the four sacred mountains in the east, south, west,
and north, to act as messengers for the Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschógan—Talking
Gods and House Gods—who had their abodes on
them. On the same plane, one behind the other, the Winds
were ranged in streaks, White, Blue, Yellow, and Black. Outside
of all Coyote placed a streak of Red Wind. This forced
itself to the inside many years later and gave rise to disease and
premature death, for as the good Winds are life-breathing, so the
evil Winds are life-taking. Even now the Red Wind takes the
lives of many children every year.</p>

<pb n="094" /><anchor id="Pg094" />

<figure url="images/image54.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschógan</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>Second in general importance only to Hasché̆ltĭ among Navaho deities is the House God,
here shown. His position among the gods is quite parallel with that of peace chief among
Indians in life. Like the majority of the myth characters he has numerous counterparts
in the various world quarters.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschógan</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The Dĭgí̆n made their homes near Chóĭli, close to the place
of emergence. It was there that all ceremonies took place.
From their homes the people saw a dark Cloud settle and cover
the top of Chóĭli. For four days it kept lowering until the
mountain was completely shrouded in dark blue fog. They did
not know whether it portended good or evil, but realized that
something of moment was at hand. Ástsĕ Hástĭn ascended the
mountain through the fog to learn what it meant, but found nothing
unusual. As he turned to descend, a faint, apparently distant cry
reached his ears, but he paid no heed. Ere long the same sound
came to him again; then a third and a fourth time, whereupon
he turned and walked in the direction whence it came. On the
eastern slope he found a tiny baby, and wrapping it in rays of
sunbeams he carried it home to his wife.</p>

<p>The Cloud that descended was a portion of the sky which had
come to meet the Earth; from the union of the two Yólkai
Ĕstsán, White-Shell Woman, was born. In twelve days the baby
had grown to maturity, subsisting on pollen only. Ástsĕ Hástĭn
and Ástsĕ Ĕstsán sent messengers to all the Dĭgín to tell them of
the marvel and to summon them to a ceremony which would be
held four days later. Word was sent also to the gods on the
four sacred mountains.</p>

<p>Ástsĕ Ĕstsán dressed Yólkai Ĕstsán in fine garments ornamented
with beautiful jewels. At the western side of her hogán she
placed a sacred deerskin and laid upon it several wool and cotton
blankets, covering the whole with a mountain-lion skin. These
were arranged as the seat of honor for White-Shell Woman, for
whom was about to be held a ceremony celebrating her maturity.</p>

<p>On the appointed day all assembled. The first matter to
decide was the number of songs to be sung. Some wished
fourteen, others thought twelve sufficient. Hasché̆ltĭ, Talking
God, sang the songs and chose to sing fourteen. When he had
finished, each of the Holy People sang six songs, making in all
two hundred and eighty-two. An entire night was thus consumed.
At dawn Ástsĕ Ĕstsán came into the hogán with a white-shell
bowl containing yucca root, a black <hi rend="font-style: italic">tózŭs</hi>, or water bottle,<pb n="095" /><anchor id="Pg095" />
containing black rain, and a blue one with blue rain. From each
bottle she poured a little water upon the yucca root and proceeded
to wash Yólkai Ĕstsán and all her finery. That done, Yólkai
Ĕstsán was directed to run toward the rising sun for a short
distance and return. Many of the young people followed, a
chosen singer chanting eight songs during their absence. The
ceremony finished, the assemblage returned to their homes, each
of the selected singers taking one of the blankets from the seat
in return for his services.</p>

<p>Although all the people then on earth were of the Dĭgí̆n, only
a few had god-like powers, particularly First Man, First Woman,
Yólkai Ĕstsán, and the Winds. The lesser Holy Ones worked
much in clay, making pottery and adobe houses. The designs
they used in their earthenware, however, were of a sacred nature,
to be used only in ceremonials, and when the Fox, Wolf, Badger,
Bird, and many other people repeatedly employed sacred symbols to
adorn their cooking pots, First Man and his wife became very
angry and called a council, which, in addition to themselves, was
attended by Chĕhonaái, Yólkai Ĕstsán, and Ní̆lchi, the Wind
People.</p>

<p>The wicked people had homes throughout the land, many of
which were built of stone, upon the plains, and others in the cliffs.
The councillors decided that these people and their homes must
be destroyed, but how to effect this was a problem.</p>

<p>First Woman and Chĕhonaái thought it would be wise to
give birth to demoniac monsters and let them devour the evil
ones, but First Man objected, and finally the council agreed that
the Winds should perform the task by bringing forth a devastating
storm. The faithful were warned and given time to seek
refuge under the water, inside the sacred mountains, in the higher
cliffs, and in the sky. Then the Winds came. For four days
terrific storms raged, hurling men and trees and houses through
the air like leaves. When they abated hundreds of houses lay<pb n="096" /><anchor id="Pg096" />
in ruins which may yet be traced by heaps of stones scattered
throughout the Navaho country.</p>

<figure url="images/image55.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Antelope Ruin - Canon del Muerto</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Antelope Ruin - Canon del Muerto</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Soon another council of the same dictators was called, this
time to discuss how more people might be created. First Man
sent Wind messengers to bring Black Fog Boy and Black Cloud
Girl, Precious Stone Boy and Precious Stone Girl, White Corn
Boy and Yellow Corn Girl, Blue Corn Boy and All-Color Corn
Girl, Pollen Boy and Cricket Girl, and Rain Boy and Rain Girl.
These twelve were laid side by side on four sacred deerskins and
covered with four others. The Spirit Winds of the west came
and blew between the skins; the Spirit Winds of the east came
and blew also; then came Hasché̆ltĭ from the east, with rainbows
in his hand, calling "Wu-hu-hu-hu-u"; and Haschógan from the
south, with sunbeams in his hand. They walked up and gently
tapped the skins with their bows and beams. Hasché̆ltĭ of the west
and Haschógan of the north came next and gently tapped the skins.
Then the skins lifted, revealing twelve beautiful young people
perfectly formed. Ástsĕ Hástĭn bade them arise and stand, and
then with Hasché̆ltĭ in the lead and Haschógan behind, they four
times encircled the sacred mountains Chóĭli and Tzĭlhnúhodĭhlĭ,
halting close to the hole whence the Holy People emerged. There
Ástsĕ Hástĭn made them an extended speech, telling them that
they had been brought forth from the elements to people the
earth; that they must rear children and care for them as kind
fathers and mothers, teaching them to be good to one another;
and that it would be necessary for them to plant corn and other
seeds at once. The Dĭgí̆n, First Man continued, were about to
leave, to go into the rivers, the oceans, the cliffs, the mountains,
off to the horizon, and to the sky, but they would ever keep watch
over their people and would help those who showed them respect
and reverence in prayer and song. To Yólkai Ĕstsán was entrusted
future guardianship of the people. It would be her duty to
furnish the he-rain and the she-rain, to fructify all crops, and
bring forth abundant grass and seeds.</p>

<p>Then the Dĭgí̆n took their departure, vanishing the people
knew not whither. Yólkai Ĕstsán turned westward to her whiteshell<pb n="097" /><anchor id="Pg097" />
home on the horizon, far out across the wide waters. Arriving
there she determined to make a few more people. Cuticle
rubbed from her body, with bits of white shell, turquoise, abalone,
and jet, she placed between two sacred deerskins, male and female,
and called for the Spirit Winds of the east, the Spirit Winds of
the west, Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschógan, who came and breathed upon
and tapped the deerskins as once before, and lo! there arose four
pairs of people.</p>

<p>Each pair was given a walking-stick—one of white shell to
one, staffs of turquoise, abalone, and jet respectively to the others.
Black Fog and Black Cloud came and spread out over the water.
Upon these the new people took up their journey eastward to join
others like themselves. For four days they travelled on Fog
and Cloud, reaching the earth at the end of the fourth day, where,
on the following day, they were welcomed by Chĕhonaái, the
Sun. There, too, the Bear, the Wolf, the Great Snake, the Mountain
Lion, the Weasel, and the Porcupine met them at the direction
of Yólkai Ĕstsán, to guard them on their long land journey.
The Lightning also she made, to protect them from above.</p>

<p>They journeyed eastward, stopping to camp and rest at the
end of the first day. For water they had but to prod the earth
with their walking-sticks and a spring gushed forth. The
first of the four, the man of White Shell, stuck his staff into
the ground and water came up at once. "The water is close,"
he remarked, from which speech he took his name, for the
others henceforth called him To Ahánĭ, Water Is Close. The
following night the Turquoise Woman brought water, but it was
bitter, so she said, from which fact she took her name of To
Dĭchínĭ, Bitter Water. The man who tried for water on the
third night found only a muddy flow, so the others called him
Hashklí̆shnĭ, Mud. The fourth night they camped in sight of the
Dĭné̆ (Navaho) whom they had come to join. The woman of the
fourth pair called attention to the houses in the caves, after which
they called her Kí̆nya Ánĭ, Houses in the Cliffs.<note place="foot"><p>These four names still survive among the Navaho, applied to as many clans.</p></note></p>

<pb n="098" /><anchor id="Pg098" />

<p>The following day they were welcomed by the twelve who
had been created and given dominion over the land but a short
time before, and from these twenty have the pure-blood Navaho
descended.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MIRACLE PERFORMERS</head>

<figure url="images/image56.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nayé̆nĕzganĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>Two of the most important characters in Navaho mythology are twin miracle-performing
sons of White-Shell Woman, Yólkai Ĕstsán, chief goddess. This plate pictures the leader of
the two—the first conceived and the first-born, whose father is the sun. His name means
"Slayer of Alien Gods," from <hi rend="font-style: italic">aná</hi>, alien; <hi rend="font-style: italic">ye</hi>, gods; <hi rend="font-style: italic">agánĭ</hi>, to kill. By him, with the
assistance of Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ, his twin brother, were killed numerous bird, animal, rock, and
human monsters, typifying evils, who wantonly destroyed human life.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Nayé̆nĕzganĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>When the Spirit People came upon this earth from below
they made six sacred mountains, four on the distant horizon
at the cardinal points and two in the centre, Chóĭli and
Tzĭlhnúhodĭíhlĭ. On the eastern slope of Chóĭli, brought forth
as the daughter of Earth and Sky, was born Yólkai Estsán,
White-Shell Woman. First Man took her to his home near
Tzĭlhnúhodĭhlĭ, where she matured in twelve days into a beautiful
woman with supernatural powers. Later she lived in a
home of her own at the foot of this mountain. It was while
there that she gave birth to twin boys who became saviours of
their people, slaying alien gods who were fast depopulating the
earth.</p>

<p>Yólkai Estsán would often lie on the eastern slope of the
mountain as the sun rose through the morning, and when the day
grew warm would seek the shade of jutting rocks from which
trickled shining drops of water. Quite unknown to herself she
had conceived one day from the sunbeams and the dripping water.
When she became aware that she was to become a mother Yólkai
Ĕstsán was made very happy, for she did not enjoy living alone.
Soon she found herself the proud possessor of twin boys. The
first-born and the stronger came to be known in his youth as
Nayé̆nĕzganĭ, Slayer of Alien Gods; the other was always known
as Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ, Born From Water. Their prenatal life covered
a period of only twelve days, and maturity was attained in thirty-two
days after passing through eight changes, one of which came
every four days.</p>

<p>At that time the earth was infested with great giants, foreign
gods, who were rapidly destroying the people. Of these, Yéĭtso,
Big God, as large as a mountain, was the only one in human<pb n="099" /><anchor id="Pg099" />
form. The others were Man-eating Bird, Rolling Stone, that
crushed all in its path, Tracking Bear, and Antelope, who killed
without mercy. Fearing lest some of these monsters learn of
the presence of her boys, Yólkai Ĕstsán kept them hidden away on
the mountain side, but they chafed under confinement, so she made
them bows and arrows and let them play about, but admonished
them not to stray far from home. The boys promised to obey,
but not long afterward, because in reply to their questions their
mother told them she did not know who their father was, they
became sulky and broke their promise, going off toward the east.
They would go and search for someone who knew. When on
a small knoll a long way from home they heard a whispered
"Sh-h."</p>

<p>"Are you afraid, my younger brother?" asked Nayé̆nĕzganĭ.</p>

<p>"No!" was the quick response.</p>

<p>Four times they heard the whisper, and then two of the
Wind People appeared. "We saw you travelling eastward,"
said they, "and came to caution you. The land is cursed with
alien gods who kill for pleasure; beware of them! Why do you
journey thus alone without your father?"</p>

<p>"Our father! Alas, we know nothing of him and are now
starting on a search to learn. Do you know who he is?"
asked the boys.</p>

<p>"Yes, the Sun is your father; but if you think to find him
you will have to travel far eastward and cross the wide, wide
waters."</p>

<p>Nayé̆nĕzganĭ turned to his younger brother and said, "Sítsĭlĭ,
let us go."</p>

<p>The Sun was then overhead. Being in fact of a holy nature,
the boys covered distance rapidly and by mid-afternoon had
passed well beyond the limits of their homeland. There they<pb n="100" /><anchor id="Pg100" />
came upon an old woman sitting beside a ladder projecting from
a hole. She asked them who they were and whither they were
going. They told her to the Sun, whose sons they were, but
whom they had never seen.</p>

<figure url="images/image57.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>This is Born From Water, the second of the twin miracle-performing sons of Yólkai
Ĕstsán, the White-Shell Woman. His brother is Nayé̆nĕzganĭ.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>"I pity you, my grandchildren," said the old woman; "come
in here and rest a moment before going on." She started down
the ladder and the boys followed. Twelve ladders were descended
before her home was reached. The old woman was Spider
Woman, the little grandmother who belonged to the Holy Ones.
Her home was well kept, clean and comfortable, and the boys
were glad to rest. Said she, "My grandchildren, your journey is
long and many trials will beset you before you reach the end.
Take these life feathers; they will help you; if difficulties befall
you, use them," and she gave to each two feathers plucked from
a living eagle.</p>

<p>The boys took the feathers, thanked her, and resumed their
journey. After travelling a long way they came to a ridge of
loose, yellow sand. It afforded poor footing for an ascent, but
the boys struggled to the top, only to have the whole side of the
ridge slide and carry them back. Three times the bank gave
way as they were about to reach its crest; on the fourth trial they
bethought themselves of the sacred feathers, and putting them
on their feet marched readily over.</p>

<p>They travelled unimpeded then for quite a long distance,
in time coming to four rows of tall, thorny reeds with spiked
branches. The reeds grew far enough apart to permit travellers
to pass into them, but closed whenever the unwary allowed himself
to be caught, and he never escaped. The boys marched
boldly up to the reeds and started in, then darted back quickly.
The reeds closed instantly, but did not catch them. Then they put
the life feathers on their feet again and jumped over all four rows.</p>

<p>The next obstacle was a deep cañon with precipitous walls.
This, however, was not a serious impediment, for the life feathers,
as before, helped them to cross it in one bound. By nightfall
the boys had arrived at a broad, beautiful meadow where lived
the Wósakĭdĭ, or Grasshopper People, who received them kindly,<pb n="101" /><anchor id="Pg101" />
giving them food and beds for the night. On being asked
whither they were bound, the boys replied that they were journeying
to the home of the Sun, their father, whom they had
never seen.</p>

<p>The Wósakĭdĭ cautioned the boys of dangers ahead, and as
they were about to depart in the morning gave them little balls
of yellow sputum to put in their mouths to prevent poisoning,
should they find it necessary to eat or smoke among hostile
people, and two sacred wands of turquoise and white shell. Two
of the Wósakĭdĭ also accompanied them for a time as guides.</p>

<p>They had not been long on their way when they came to
a place where the trail ran between two high, smooth-faced
bowlders. "These," said their Wósakĭdĭ companions, "are the
Bumping Rocks. If you step into that narrow passageway
between them they will crash together and kill you." The boys
started as if to enter, but fell back. The huge rocks came
violently together, but did no harm. The feint was made three
times, and each time the rocks crashed together and bounded
back. The fourth time the boys entered they placed their
sacred wands of turquoise and white shell across the gap above
their heads and passed through, for these held the bowlders apart.
As they emerged on the opposite side they saw the Sun rising
from his eastern home and he was yet far away.</p>

<p>Soon a wide stretch of water was encountered; so far as they
could see there was nothing but water. Here again they used
their life feathers and were carried safely over. Four successive
stretches of water and land were crossed, and still a fifth sheet of
water lay before them. Along its shores paddled many varieties
of animals. The boys looked out across the deep and could
discern away out in the centre a house of turquoise and white
shell, its roof glistening in the sunlight. Certain that it must
be the home of their father, they readjusted their life feathers
to start across, but found that they had lost control over them.
They tried them several times in different places, but to no avail.<pb n="102" /><anchor id="Pg102" />
The thought of not reaching their father's house when so near
filled their hearts with bitter disappointment. Seemingly there
was naught that they could do, but they sat and pondered.</p>

<figure url="images/image58.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆zhĭnĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>Black God, the God of Fire. An important deity of the Navaho, but appearing
infrequently in their mythology and ceremonies.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆zhĭnĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>As they sat there in silence, Snipe Man, a little old fellow,
came to them and asked, "Where do you go, my grandchildren?"</p>

<p>"To the home of the Sun," the boys replied.</p>

<p>"Do you know anyone there?"</p>

<p>"Yes," said they, "the Sun is our father." Thereupon Snipe
Man placed a rainbow bridge across the water and told them to
pass on, first warning them against two large Bears, the Lightning,
Snakes, and Wind, who guarded the home of the Sun. They
crossed over the rainbow bridge, which took them almost to the
door of the house, and there they were met by the Bears with
bristling coats. Nayé̆nĕzganĭ spoke to them, saying, "I am the
child of Yólkai Ĕstsán." They let him pass. Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ
uttered the same words and passed on also. The same words
took the boys past the Lightning, the Snakes, and the Wind, and
they entered the house, going through four doorways before
coming to the living-rooms in the interior.</p>

<p>There they found an elderly woman, radiantly beautiful, with
two handsome boys and girls, the like of whom they had never
seen. They stood transfixed as if in a dream until the voice of
the beautiful woman, who was the wife of the Sun, startled them,
demanding to know how they dared to enter a sacred place
forbidden to all save the Dĭgí̆n.</p>

<p>Nayé̆nĕzganĭ replied, saying, "This is the end of our journey.
We came to see our father, the Sun and this we are told is
his home."</p>

<p>The wife raged with anger, making dire threats against her
husband if what the boys asserted were true, which she did not
doubt since they had found it possible to gain entrance to her
home. Could it be that he was the father of many of whom
she knew nothing? She would find out. Surely he must have
smiled upon most ugly creatures if these two boys were his sons!</p>

<p>It was about time for the Sun to return. As his wife thought
of what he might do to the boys, her anger turned to compassion,<pb n="103" /><anchor id="Pg103" />
and she bade them wrap themselves in the clouds that hung on
the wall, and hide. Ere long a great rattle was heard outside,
and a moment later the Sun came striding in and hung up his
glistening shield. "What strangers are here?" he asked. There
was no answer. Again he asked the question, repeating it a third
time and a fourth, waxing angry. Then his wife began to scold.
She told him that two boys of his, the ugliest creatures she had
ever looked upon, had come to see their father, and demanded to
know what it meant. "Where are they?" asked the Sun; but
his wife did not reply to the question; instead she kept on scolding.
The Sun looked about, and noting a change in the clouds
that hung upon the western wall, took them down and unfolded
them, until he discovered Nayé̆nĕzganĭ and Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ.</p>

<p>The Sun became angrier than ever and determined to have done
with the trouble at once by killing the boys. From the eastern
wall of the room projected numerous sharp spikes of white shell.
There were turquoise spikes in the southern, abalone in the
western, and jet in the northern walls. The boys were each
hurled against the first of these, but dropped to the floor unharmed;
then against the second, the third, and the fourth, with
a like result. On the floor near the walls sat four large mortars
with heavy pestles in them. The boys were placed in each of
these successively and pounded, as their father thought, into
fragments, but out of this also they came unharmed.</p>

<p>The Sun then waved them to a seat and brought forth four
large pipes, two of abalone and two of lignite. He handed two
of each to the boys, saying, "I wish you to have a good smoke."</p>

<p>"Beware!" whispered the Wind. "His tobacco is poisoned!"</p>

<p>The boys deftly sought the little balls they had received from
the Wósakĭdĭ, slipped them into their mouths, and began puffing.
When the first pipefuls were finished they laid the pipes on the
floor and picked up the other two, showing no sign of distress.</p>

<p>Seeing that the poison tobacco was having no effect on the
youthful strangers, the Sun sent for Haschógan and Hasché̆zhĭnĭ,<pb n="104" /><anchor id="Pg104" />
the House God and the Fire God, to come and build a sweat-house
and heat large stones as hot as they could be made, so that
they might burst into fragments and fill the sweat-lodge with
scalding steam when water was poured upon them. By the time
the boys had finished their second pipes, which proved as harmless
as the others, the little house and heated stones were ready.
Haschógan made the lodge of stone and covered it with earth,
erecting double walls on the northern side with a space between,
into which he provided an entrance from the inside, concealed
with a flat stone slab.</p>

<figure url="images/image59.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ga<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭdĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>This is the personation of the Navaho God of Harvest. The name signifies "Hunchback."
He is represented always in a stooping posture, carrying a staff to aid him in supporting a
burden of corn, bean, pumpkin, and other seeds which he carries upon his back. The
personation is conventional, rather than literal, in intent.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ga<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> askĭdĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The Sun looked into the lodge, saw that it was tight, and
told the boys to enter. As they passed in Haschógan whispered,
"Get behind the stone slab on the north!" Then Hasché̆zhĭnĭ
rolled in several red-hot bowlders and closed the entrance tightly
with heavy cloud blankets. White, blue, yellow, and black
water was then thrown in, and there followed the sounds of the
sizzling steam and bursting stones; fragments could be heard
striking the walls on all sides. After a short while the boys
heard the voice of their father call out from the east, "Are you
warm?" They gave no response. He called again from the
south, but received no answer; then from the west; all was
silence. "Surely I am rid of them at last," thought he. He
called once again from the north, and to his great surprise received
a reply. The sweat-house had cooled enough to permit the boys
to emerge from their hiding-place, so their cheerful voices came
from near the doorway.</p>

<p>"These must be my sons," thought the Sun, and throwing
back the blankets from the door he embraced them. "My
children, whence came you and how did you get here?"</p>

<p>The story of their home at Tzĭlhnúhodĭhlĭ, of their long
journey across land and water, and of the many obstacles encountered,
was soon told. Then the Sun directed his wife and
daughters to remould the boys and make them as handsome as
themselves. When that was done all entered the house, where
on the walls hung many beautiful strings of turquoise, abalone,
white-shell, and jet beads, and plates of armor. These were<pb n="105" /><anchor id="Pg105" />
offered to the boys, but they refused them, saying they cared
not for jewels, preferring instead to have lightning arrows, strong
bows, and heavy knives with which to battle with the giant alien
gods who were destroying people in all parts of the earth. The
Sun gave them the weapons desired, and when it came time
to resume his journey across the sky he took his newfound sons
with him.</p>

<p>Near Tsótzĭlh, the sacred mountain of the south, lived Yéĭtso,
the Big God. The boys wished to try their skill on him first, so
their father let them down from the sky upon that mountain.
The giant was drinking from a lake and saw the reflection of his
new enemies as they dropped upon the mountain. He straightened
up quickly and sent an arrow aimed for the body of
Nayé̆nĕzganĭ, but the boy dodged quickly and responded with a
bolt of lightning which stripped the armor from Yéĭtso's feet.
Three more shafts of lightning struck the armor from the hips,
body, and head of this fiercest of giants, exposing his vitals to the
attack of the boys, who filled him with arrows, killing him
instantly. The Big God's blood began to flow down a cañon.
Nayé̆nĕzganĭ drew a line across its path with his stone knife, and
the blood ceased flowing onward, rising in a wall across the
cañon's head, over which now plunges a beautiful waterfall.</p>

<p>The brothers then set off for home, taking the heart of their
slain enemy with them. Arriving at Tzĭlhnúhodĭhlĭ they found
their mother in tears, for she was certain that her boys had been
killed and devoured by monsters. Though unchanged in size, so
altered were they in appearance that Yólkai Ĕstsán could not
believe them to be her own boys whom she was mourning as
dead, but the story of their adventures from the time they had
left home was soon told, and all rejoiced.</p>

<p>In the days following, Nayé̆nĕzganĭ and Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ made
incursions into the lands of the alien gods, killing them all and
freeing the earth from the dread and curse of these man-killing<pb n="106" /><anchor id="Pg106" />
monsters. The first to meet destruction at their hands when they
took up their deliberate search for giants was Déĭlgĕt, Giant
Antelope, who had great blue horns upon which he tossed people to
death. The next accosted was Tsĕ Nahálĭ, the preying Mountain
Eagle, and soon after they sought and killed Tsĕtahídzĭlhtúhlĭ,
Among The Rocks He Kicks Them Down The Mountain. Then
Bĭnáyeaganĭ, Who Kills With His Eyes, met death, followed shortly
after by Tsé̆agai, Rolling Bowlder, and Sŭsh Nalkái, Tracking
Bear, the last to lose their lives at the hands of the youthful warriors,
Nayé̆nĕzganĭ and Tobadzĭschínĭ, who have since remained
the War Gods of the Navaho.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>LEGEND OF THE HAPPINESS CHANT</head>

<figure url="images/image60.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tónenĭlĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>Tónenĭlĭ, Water Sprinkler, is the Rain God of the Navaho. He it is who sends the
rain, the hail, and the snow, and causes thunder and lightning. The personator of this
god in the ceremonies assumes the additional character of a clown and as such creates much
merriment in the dances in which he appears. His apparel consists principally of spruce
boughs and a mask.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Tónenĭlĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The Hozhónĭ Hatál, or Happiness Chant, is a nine-days' chant
held inside a hogán, and like many of the Navaho ceremonies, it
was derived from another tribe. The myth relating to it tells
of a renowned warrior who had two beautiful sisters whom he
wished to see married, but only to men who should first prove
their strength and valor in a feat of arms; so word was sent to
all the young men of the warrior's tribe to gather at his home
on a certain day, prepared for war, if they wished to enter a
contest he would then propose. The girls being coveted prizes,
a goodly number of warriors, painted and dressed in full war
regalia, assembled on the appointed day, among them being two
old, white-haired brothers, of an alien tribe, who had recently
come to live near the Navaho people. The young chief protested
at the presence of the old men, declaring that they would only
sacrifice their lives in the first combat, for they could have no
possible hope of success. The two persisted, however, and were
allowed to remain in the van.</p>

<p>Four-days journey from the Navaho country was a village of
the Áya Kĭnné̆, Have Holes For Houses, enemies from early
times. They also prided themselves on having two very beautiful
girls, upon whom many admiring young men of the tribe bestowed
valuable presents of turquoise, shell beads, and other jewels. One<pb n="107" /><anchor id="Pg107" />
of these wondrous beauties wore her hair plaited always with rich
strings of turquoise; the other with strings of white shell.</p>

<p>"To the two men," said the vaunting young Navaho, "who
will fight their way to the homes of these boasted beauties and
bring to me their jewel-plaited scalps, will I give my sisters."</p>

<p>The band started, each man eager and hopeful, and on the
fourth night bivouacked in sight of the cliffs under which the
hated Áya Kĭnné̆ had their homes. At daybreak on the following
morning they made their attack on the pueblo, but the villagers,
ever alert and well prepared for an onslaught, offered desperate
resistance, every man fighting bravely for his life and his family.
All day long the contest raged; arrow, lance, and stone hammer
dealing death on every hand. As nightfall shrouded the combatants
in darkness, the invaders, depleted in rank, slunk back to
their camp on the hill, where they found the two gray-haired
brothers, each bearing a jewelled scalp as his trophy.</p>

<p>When the Navaho chief learned that the old men were
the victors, he raged with anger, condemning his tribesmen
and vowing that his sisters should never become the wives of
unknown aliens, and accordingly declared a new contest. The
man who would win a beautiful wife must hit the blade of a
yucca plant with an arrow at forty paces. The long, narrow
blade was hung in the bark of a tree and the contest commenced.
The younger men shot first. One by one they
twanged their bows, and one by one marched off in sullen humor.
At last it came the turn of the aged brothers. The first shot
his arrow, and the slender leaf was pierced; the second shot, and
again the leaf was pierced; but so soon as the second arrow had
hit its mark the Navaho declared a new feat, contending that
this had not been sufficient. A long race was then arranged, and
once more the brothers came off victorious.</p>

<pb n="108" /><anchor id="Pg108" />

<p>The chief became desperate. Some feat must be devised in
which his own men could prove the superior. In the wall of
a high cliff not far distant was a small hole, barely larger than
a half-closed hand, and just above the reach of the average man.
The ones who could run past that hole, jump, and thrust their
hands into it as they did so, might claim the sisters. One by
one the young Navaho warriors leaped wildly and struck out for
the hole in the cliff, but none could thrust his hand into it.
Then the elderly brothers ran past, sprang lightly, and darted a
hand each into the pocket.</p>

<figure url="images/image61.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>These deific characters in Navaho mythology, though beneficent always, have no
special functions to perform. The name means "Fringe Mouth" and has no ascertainable
significance other than that these spirits, whose abode is in the water, are supposed to have
peculiar markings about their mouths. Rescue from drowning invariably redounds to the glory
of these gods.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>But for the third time the Navaho chief declared the test insufficient.
The cliff was high. They who would marry his sisters
must shoot an arrow over its rim; so a second contest in archery
took place, but only the feathered reeds of the white-haired
brothers passed out of sight.</p>

<p>Still the old men were refused the prizes they had fairly won
so many times. A dance was called. Finding no way to outdo
the two brothers in skill or strength, the young chief left the
selection of husbands to his sisters. They should join the men
in the dance and go home with whom they chose. The aliens
did not join the dancers, preferring instead to remain in their
own little brush house half a mile distant, with its single-slant
roof, "For it is foolish," said one, "to think that two such
handsome young maidens as they are would ever look with favor
upon our rags and wrinkles. We would better lie here to-night
and rest in sleep after our busy day." Each then brought forth
a sacred pipe and tobacco, which they used only on rare occasions.
One had a pipe of rich blue turquoise, and the other one of fine,
pure white shell. They filled them, smoking in silence. From
the distance the songs and laughter of the merry dancers greeted
their ears, but not as joyous sounds. Each smoked with apparent
resolution, blowing forth cloud after cloud of filmy whiteness,
and lo! as they smoked each noticed that the other had grown
youthful in appearance! Their tattered garments, too, as insensibly
as the creeping shadows, changed their forms, becoming
fine shirts, leggings, and moccasins.</p>

<pb n="109" /><anchor id="Pg109" />

<p>At the dance the younger sister asked, "What is it that smells
so sweet?"</p>

<p>"I have noticed nothing," the other replied.</p>

<p>"Come over here and face the breeze," said the first; and
there, sure enough, came wafts of air sweet and savory. Neither
had ever before scented anything so pleasing, and they determined
to follow the aroma against the breeze. The moon shed ample
light to guide their footsteps, and once locating the true direction
whence the wind came, the two had no difficulty in threading
their way straight to the home of the brothers who had vanquished
so many rivals in so many feats. Knowing nothing of the men,
other than that they were strangers from an alien tribe, the girls
were somewhat startled at coming so boldly face to face with them;
but a moment's hesitation gave them assurance, for surely, they
thought, such finely dressed, handsome men could mean no harm.</p>

<p>Said one: "What it was we did not know, so came to
determine if we could; but the most delicious odor we ever
smelled seemed to fill the air about us at the dance, coming
always from this direction, and now we see that it was the smoke
of your tobacco. It must be a wonderful land, where you come
from, if tobacco like that grows there."</p>

<p>"That you may see for yourselves," answered the elder
brother, "for we have come to take you there if you will but consent
to go. Our land is rich in jewels and possesses a soil that
grows bountiful crops of many kinds, some of which you have
never seen. Marry us and you shall live always in abundance."</p>

<p>The girls consented, and at bedtime retired with their husbands
for the night, only to waken in the morning, however, to a sense
of horror; for whom should they find beside them but the two
grim-visaged old men so cordially hated by all their tribe! They
dared not to display their fear and horror before the men, who
were quite awake, though feigning sleep, but each read the<pb n="110" /><anchor id="Pg110" />
other's feelings at a glance. Where were they? Where had
they been? Had they merely dreamed of meeting two handsome,
well-clad strangers in the night? Slowly their memories came
back—the last shooting contest, the preparation for the dance,
the songs and feasting, the enchanting perfumed breezes, and
their quest—they remembered now. But how this change in
their companions? They were strangers, and unquestionably
magicians who could transform themselves or work spells on
others! With this thought the desire for vengeance increased
with every pulse-beat.</p>

<figure url="images/image62.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschĕbaád</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>In Navaho mythology there are numerous references to benevolent female deities, who
are personated in medicine rites by men wearing masks, as shown in this plate. Haschĕbaád
may be translated "female deity," or "goddess."</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschĕbaád</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The day wore on before the women had a chance to talk
together apart from their husbands, when they agreed that they
would return to their home and tell their brother of the evil
worked upon them by the old men, whom they would then soon
see killed; but the Little Whirlwind whispered to them, "Return
not to your home; anger fills the hearts of all your people, and
it is you who would be killed with clubs and stones." Thwarted
in this plan, they determined to leave and search for a distant
tribe of which they had once heard, that lived in peace, and
had never led the life of marauders. There, surely, they might
receive food and shelter and freedom from the sorcery of their
husbands. Each would take a separate course upon starting, to
meet at a wooded mountain in the east.</p>

<p>All went well throughout the day; the old men rested and
made ready for the journey to their home-land, on which they
planned to start at daybreak. That night the women did not
sleep. When their husbands became wrapt in slumber, they
quietly crawled out from their furs, snatched a little food, and
glided into the moonlight. They had been gone but a short
time when one of the old men arose to stir the fire, and in deep
surprise noted the absence of the women. He called his brother,
and the two held a hurried consultation. They circled the lodge,
but in the dimness of the light could discern no guiding footprint
to tell the direction in which their young wives had gone.
Returning to the camp, they filled their sacred pipes, and in
silence sat and smoked. Soon a thin curl of smoke was seen<pb n="111" /><anchor id="Pg111" />
drifting southward, winding in and out among the piñons; then
another on the north side. These they followed, bearing eastward,
smoking as they went, and as the sun began to tint the
higher hills and mountain crests with yellow, bathing all else in
purple shadows, they came upon their wives in a little rocky
cañon screened by thickly growing cedar and piñon. The smoke
foretold the women of their doom, so they were not taken by
surprise.</p>

<p>Seeing no way to escape, the girls resigned themselves to fate,
and meekly followed the old men back to camp, whence they
journeyed with them to the west.</p>

<p>At their home the brothers had wives and children, so they
did not herald their new consorts as such, but wedded them at
once to their eldest sons. This prospect pleased the two young
women, and they entered into the spirit of the new life with zest.
They learned the songs and chants of the rites of the Snake and
the Bear people—the clans to which these younger husbands
belonged—and taught them to a young brother who came to
visit them. When the brother returned to the Navaho people,
he told them that his sisters were quite happy, and with the songs
he had learned from them he originated the Hozhónĭ Hatál,
Happiness Chant.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>LEGEND OF THE NIGHT CHANT</head>

<p>Long years ago three brothers—the eldest rich, the second
a wayward, roving gambler, and the youngest a mere boy—lived
together among their kind, the Dĭné̆ people. Their only sister
was married, living apart with her husband. The gambler often
took property belonging to his brothers, going to distant corners
of the land to stake it on games of chance. On returning, he
never failed to relate a story of wonders he had seen—the Holy
People whom he had met, and who revealed many things to him.<pb n="112" /><anchor id="Pg112" />
His brothers never believed him, calling him Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ, The
Dreamer.</p>

<figure url="images/image63.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> askĭdĭ. Zahadolzhá. Hasché̆ltĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>The personated deities pictured in this plate appear together in acts of succor in the
Night Chant in the order seen, the Talking God in the lead. From left to right they are,
respectively, the God of Harvest, Fringe Mouth, and Talking God.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> askĭdĭ. Zahadolzhá. Hasché̆ltĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>One day they wished to go hunting, but did not want The
Dreamer to accompany them, so, going to the home of their
brother-in-law, they told him of their purpose, and all three stole
away. As the sun began its descent on the fourth day, it occurred
to Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ that he had been tricked, so he started in search
of the hunters, hoping to meet them returning, that he might
help them carry their game and be rewarded with a pelt or two.
He travelled far, but had not come upon them when the sun
passed behind the distant hills. Near by was a deep, rock-walled
cañon, from the depths of which many mingled voices
could be heard. Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ walked to its edge and peered over.
Back and forth from side to side flew countless crows, passing in
and out of dark holes in opposite walls. From below, when
darkness had shrouded all, Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ heard a human voice
call in loud echoing tones, "They say, they say, they say, they
say!"</p>

<p>From the far side came the answer: "Yes, yes! What's the
matter now? What's the matter now?"</p>

<p>"Two people were killed to-day," continued the voice just
below.</p>

<p>"Who were they? Who were they?"</p>

<p>To which the first voice answered, "Anahailí̆hĭ, killed at
sunrise, and Igákĭzhĭ, killed at dusk, by the People of the Earth.
They went in search of meat, and the hunters shot arrows into
them. We are sorry, but they were told to be careful and did
not heed. It is too late to help them now; let us go on with
the chant."</p>

<p>It had grown very dark, and Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ became greatly
frightened, but he stayed to listen and watch. Muffled strains of
songs came from the deep recesses in each cañon wall,—the
gods were singing—and just within the openings, discernible in
the glow of a fire, could be seen many dancers performing in
unison as they kept time with rattles. Throughout the night
firelight flickered from wall to wall and singing and dancing<pb n="113" /><anchor id="Pg113" />
continued. At daylight the participants departed in all directions,
so Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ resumed the quest of the hunters.</p>

<p>He had travelled but a short time when he came upon his
brothers, resting their heavy game packs on their journey
homeward.</p>

<p>"Here comes The Dreamer," spoke his elder brother. "I
will wager he has something marvellous to relate."</p>

<p>Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ was greeted first by his brother-in-law. "You
must have slept near here last night, for you are too far out to
have made this distance since daylight."</p>

<p>"I did," he replied, "near a cañon that is surely holy. A
lot of people had gathered to dance, the gods sang, and—"</p>

<p>"There, I told you he would have some lie to tell," interrupted
the eldest brother, and started on.</p>

<p>"Go ahead," urged the brother-in-law; "tell us the rest."</p>

<p>"It's no use; no one cares to listen to me," said Bĭlh
Ahatí̆nĭ.</p>

<p>His younger brother, also incredulous, took up his burden
and plodded off, whereat Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ related all that he had seen
and heard.</p>

<p>"You men must have killed those people they spoke about,"
he accused.</p>

<p>"No, it was none of us," his brother-in-law protested; "we
have killed no people. Yesterday morning one shot a crow, and
last night we killed a magpie, but there was no harm in that."</p>

<p>"I fear there was; they were hunters like yourselves, in
search of meat for the Holy People, for the time disguised as
birds," Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ ventured. Then, dividing the pack, the
two hurried on to overtake the others.</p>

<p>"Well," asked the youngest, "did you hear a fine story?"</p>

<p>"It is not a lie," his brother-in-law retorted; "we killed a
crow and a magpie yesterday, and the Holy People talked about
it in the cañon last night. Look! There come four mountain<pb n="114" /><anchor id="Pg114" />
sheep! Hurry, Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ and head them off!" They had
come upon the cañon where the strange voices had been heard.
Four sheep, among large bowlders near the rim, were carefully
threading their way out of it. The three dropped back, while
Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ ran ahead and concealed himself near the ascending
trail. As the sheep approached he drew his bow and aimed for
the leader's heart, but his fingers could not loose their grip upon
the arrow, and the sheep passed by unharmed. Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ
scrambled up over the rim of the cañon and ran to get ahead of
them again, but the bowstring would not leave his fingers as
they passed. A third effort, and a fourth, to kill the game brought
the same result. Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ cursed himself and the sheep,
but ceased suddenly, for whom should he see but four gods,
Yébĭchai, appear before him, who had transformed themselves
into sheep! Hasché̆ltĭ, in the lead, ran up to him and dropped
his <hi rend="font-style: italic">balíl</hi>—a rectangular, four-piece, folding wand—over him,
as he sat, and uttered a peculiar cry. Behind him came Zahadolzhá,
Haschĕbaád, and Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭdĭ; all were masked.</p>

<figure url="images/image64.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tónenĭlĭ, Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ, Nayé̆nĕzganĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>These three gods appear in the order shown when seen in the rites of the Navaho Night
Chant.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Tónenĭlĭ, Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ, Nayé̆nĕzganĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>"Whence came you?" Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ asked them.</p>

<p>"From Kĭnní̆nĭkai," Hasché̆ltĭ answered.</p>

<p>"Whither are you going?"</p>

<p>"To Tsé̆gyiĭ, to hold another <hi rend="font-style: italic">hatál</hi> four days from now.
You had better come along."</p>

<p>"No, I couldn't travel so far in four days."</p>

<p>But after a little parleying Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ assented. He was
told to disrobe, and doing so Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭdĭ breathed upon him, and
his raiment became the same as that of the gods. Then all took
four steps eastward, changing into mountain sheep, and bounded
away along the cañon's rim.</p>

<p>The hunters in hiding became restless as The Dreamer did
not return, so ventured out where they could view the trail on
which he was last seen. No one was in sight. One went to
the rock where Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ first hid near the sheep and followed
his tracks from hiding place to hiding place until the
fourth one was reached, and there he found his brother's old
clothes with his bow and arrows upon them. There he traced<pb n="115" /><anchor id="Pg115" />
four human footsteps to the east that merged into the trail of
five mountain sheep. The eldest brother cried in his remorse, for
he saw that his brother was holy, and he had always treated him
with scorn.</p>

<p>The gods and Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ, transformed to mountain sheep,
travelled very far during their four days' journey, coming on
the fourth day to a large hogán. Inside were numerous Holy
People, both gods and men. When Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ entered with
his four holy companions, a complaint at once arose from those
inside against an earthly odor, whereat Hasché̆ltĭ had their charge
taken out and washed with yucca-root suds.</p>

<p>Inside the hogán stood four large jewel posts upon which the
gods hung their masks. The eastern post was of white shell, the
southern of turquoise, the western of abalone, and the northern of
jet. Two jewel pipes lay beside a god sitting on the western side
of the hogán. These he filled with tobacco and lighted, passing
one each to his right and his left. All assembled smoked, the
last to receive the pipes being two large Owls sitting one on each
side of the entrance way at the east. They drew in deep
draughts of smoke and puffed them out violently. While the
smoking continued, people came in from all directions. At midnight
lightning flashed, followed by heavy thunder and rain,
which Tónenĭlĭ, Water Sprinkler, sent in anger because he had
not been apprised of the dance before it was time to begin it; but
a smoke with the assembled Holy People appeased him. Soon
after the chant began and continued until morning.</p>

<p>Some of the gods had beautiful paintings on deerskins, resembling
those now made with colored sands. These they unfolded
upon the floor of the hogán during the successive days
of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">hatál</hi>.</p>

<p>The last day of the dance was very largely attended, people
coming from all holy quarters. Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ through it all
paid close attention to the songs, prayers, paintings, and dance
movements, and the forms of the various sacred paraphernalia, and<pb n="116" /><anchor id="Pg116" />
when the <hi rend="font-style: italic">hatál</hi> was over he had learned the rite of Kléjĕ Hatál.
The gods permitted him to return to his people long enough to
perform it over his younger brother and teach him how to conduct
it for people afflicted with sickness or evil. This he did,
consuming nine days in its performance, after which he again
joined the gods at Tsé̆gyiĭ, where he now lives. His younger
brother taught the ceremony to his earthly brothers, the Navaho,
who yet conduct it under the name of Kléjĕ Hatál, Night Chant,
or Yébĭchai Hatál, The Chant of Paternal Gods.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CEREMONIES—THE NIGHT CHANT</head>

<figure url="images/image65.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yébĭchai</hi> Sweat - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>Each morning during the first four days of the Navaho Yébĭchai healing ceremony, or
Night Chant, the patient is sweated—sometimes inside a small sweat-lodge, oftener by being
placed upon a spot previously heated by a fire and covered with heavy blankets. The three
figures are medicine-men, or singers, chanting. The patient lies under the blankets surrounded
by a line of sacred meal in which turkey-feather prayer-sticks, <hi rend="font-style: italic">kĕdán</hi>, are implanted.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Yébĭchai</hi> Sweat - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>A description of the ritual and form of the Yébĭchai ceremony,—Kléjĕ
Hatál, or Night Chant,—covering its nine days
of performance, will give a comprehensive idea of all Navaho
nine-day ceremonies, which combine both religious and medical
observances. The myth characters personified in this rite
are termed Yébĭchai, Grandfather or Paternal Gods. Similar
personations appear in other ceremonies, but they figure less
prominently.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">First Day</hi>: The ceremonial, or medicine, hogán is built some
days in advance of the rite. The first day's ceremony is brief,
with few participants. Well after dark the singer, assisted by
two men, makes nine little splint hoops—<hi rend="font-style: italic">tsĭpa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>s yázhĕ kĕdán</hi>—entwined
with slip-cords, and places them on the sacred meal in
the meal basket. Following this, three men remove their everyday
clothing, take Yébĭchai masks, and leave the hogán. These
three masked figures are to represent the gods Hasché̆ltĭ, Talking
God, Haschĕbaád, Goddess, and Hasché̆lapai, Gray God.
When they have gone and passed to the rear of the hogán,
the patient comes in, disrobes at the left of the centre, passes
around the small fire burning near the entrance of the hogán, and
takes his seat in the centre, immediately after which the singing
begins. During the third song Hasché̆ltĭ enters with his cross-sticks—<hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ
balíl</hi>—and opens and places them over the
patient's body, forcing them down as far toward the ground as<pb n="117" /><anchor id="Pg117" />
possible. The second time he places them not so far over the
body; the third, not lower than the shoulders; the fourth time,
over the head only, each time giving his peculiar call, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Wu-hu-hu-hu-u!</hi>
Then Hasché̆ltĭ takes up a shell with medicine and with
it touches the patient's feet, hands, chest, back, right shoulder,
left shoulder, and top of head,—this being the prescribed ceremonial
order,—uttering his cry at each placing of the medicine. He
next places the shell of medicine to the patient's lips four times
and goes out, after which Haschĕbaád comes in, takes one of the
circle <hi rend="font-style: italic">kĕdán</hi>, touches the patient's body in the same ceremonial
order, and finally the lips, at the same time giving the slip-cord
a quick pull. Next comes Hasché̆lapai, who performs the same
incantations with the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kĕdán</hi>. Again Hasché̆ltĭ enters with the
cross-sticks, repeating the former order, after which he gives
the patient four swallows of medicine,—a potion different from
that first given,—the medicine-man himself drinking what remains
in the shell. This closes the ceremony of the first day.
There will, perhaps, be considerable dancing outside the hogán,
but that is merely practice for the public dance to be given on
the ninth night. The singer and the patient sleep in the hogán
each night until the nine days are passed, keeping the masks and
medicine paraphernalia between them when they sleep.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Second Day</hi>: Just at sunrise the patient is given the first ceremonial
sweat. This is probably given more as a spiritual purification
than in anticipation of any physical benefit. To the east
of the hogán a shallow hole is dug in the earth, in which are
placed hot embers and ashes,—covered with brush and weeds,
and sprinkled with water,—upon which the patient takes his
place. He is then well covered with blankets. The medicine-man,
assisted by Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschĕbaád, places about the
patient a row of feathered <hi rend="font-style: italic">kĕdán</hi>, and then commences to sing
while the patient squirms on the hot, steaming bed. After singing<pb n="118" /><anchor id="Pg118" />
certain songs the medicine-man lifts the blanket a little and
gives the patient a drink of medicine from a ceremonial basket.
He is again covered, and the singing goes on for a like time.
Later the blankets are removed and Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschĕbaád
perform over the patient, after which he goes to the hogán.
The brush and weeds used for the bed are taken away and earth
is scattered over the coals. This sweating, begun on the second
day, is repeated each morning for four days: the first, as above
noted, taking place east of the hogán, and the others respectively
to the south, west, and north. The ceremonies of the second
night are practically a repetition of those held the first night.
During the third song Hasché̆ltĭ enters with the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ balíl</hi>,
placing it four times in the prescribed order and giving his call;
then he goes out, re-enters, and takes from the medicine basket
four sacred reed <hi rend="font-style: italic">kĕdán</hi>. These he carries in ceremonial order to
the four cardinal points: first east, then south, next west, lastly
north. Next stick <hi rend="font-style: italic">kĕdán</hi> are taken out of the basket, which
holds twelve each of the four sacred colors. These also are
carried to the four cardinal points—white, east; blue, south;
yellow, west; black, north. After all the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kĕdán</hi> are taken out,
Hasché̆ltĭ again enters with the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ balíl</hi>, using it in directional
order and giving medicine as on the night before.</p>

<figure url="images/image66.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pĭkéhodĭklad</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>The first of the four dry-paintings used in conducting the Kléjĕ Hatál, or Night Chant,
of the Navaho, being made on the fifth night. The purpose of this night's acts is to frighten
the patient; hence the name of the painting, which signifies "Frighten Him On It."</p>

<p>The encircling figure represents the rainbow, <hi rend="font-style: italic">aklólh</hi>; the first on the left Hasché̆ltĭ,
Talking God; the central, Haschĕbaád, goddess—symbolically the patient—and the right-hand
figure a male deity, Haschĕbakú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</p>

<p>The patient sits on the central figure at its waist line during the night's performance. When
the ceremony in connection with this painting is concluded the colored sands are carefully
collected, carried out toward the north, and deposited under a tree.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Pĭkéhodĭklad</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Third Day</hi>: It is understood that the patient has been
sweated in the morning, as on the second day. On this night he
is dressed in spruce boughs by the assisting medicine-man, bound
around the wrists, arms, ankles, legs, and body, and fastened on
the head in the form of a turban. After several songs, Nayé̆nĕzganĭ
and Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ cut the boughs from the body, using a
stone arrow-point as a knife. Then the boughs are cut into
fragments over the patient's head, after which the singer takes
a feather wand, points it toward the four cardinal points above
the fire, and brushes the patient, chanting meanwhile. At the
end of the brushing he points the wand out of the smoke-hole, at
the same time blowing the dust from it out into the open air.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fourth Day</hi>: The ceremonies this day do not begin until
later than usual, probably nine o'clock. Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschĕbaád<pb n="119" /><anchor id="Pg119" />
dress and go out. The patient disrobes and takes his place.
The assisting medicine-man digs a small hole just between the
patient's feet, and encircles it with a line of <hi rend="font-style: italic">tádĭtĭn</hi>, or pollen,
leaving an opening to the east, after which the patient dons a
mask. Hasché̆ltĭ enters, followed by Haschĕbaád, who carries a
small spruce tree. The former puts sacred pollen in the hole
four times, each time giving his call; then Haschĕbaád plants the
tree in the hole and fastens its top to the patient's mask; the
mask is then pulled off the patient's head by his jerking quickly
away from the tree. This is the first night in which the ceremonies
are continued until dawn. After the unmasking, the singers take
their place at one side of the back of the hogán and begin singing
to the accompaniment of a basket drum. A youth and a maiden
are required to sit in the hogán throughout the fourth night, the
ritual requiring that these be persons who have not had sexual
knowledge.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fifth Day</hi>: This is the last day of the sweating, and the day
on which the first dry-painting is made. Just at dark this painting,
a small one, is begun inside. In size it would square about
four feet, and is placed close to the back of the hogán. There
are three figures in the painting: the central one being the
patient, the one to the left Hasché̆ltĭ, the one to the right
Haschĕbakú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>. Around this painting, at all sides except the eastern,
feather wands, <hi rend="font-style: italic">ndiá</hi>, are stuck in the ground; in this case
twelve in number. Foot-tracks are made in the sand with white
meal. Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschĕbakú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> dress ceremonially, mask, and
go out, after which the patient enters and takes his position on
the central figure of the dry-painting, facing the east. The effort
this night is to frighten the patient and thus banish the evil spirits<pb n="120" /><anchor id="Pg120" />
from his body. The two maskers come running in, uttering
weird, unearthly howls, in which every spectator in the hogán
joins, feigning great fear. The masked figures make four entries,
each like the other. In many cases the patient either actually
faints from fright or feigns to do so. The patient then leaves
the dry-painting and it is destroyed. None of the sand or other
pigments used in this painting is applied to the patient's body, as
is done with that of later paintings. The next part of the fifth
night's ceremony is the initiation of new members into the
Yébĭchai order. No one who is not a member of the order is
allowed to enter the ceremonial hogán. At the time of the
initiation Hasché̆ltĭ and Haschĕbakú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> are outside in the darkness.
The initiates enter and sit on the ground in a row—the males
naked, the women dressed in their ordinary mode. They dare
not look up, for should they see Hasché̆ltĭ before being initiated,
they would become blind. One at a time these novices take
their place in the centre of the hogán and the initiatory rite is
performed over them.</p>

<figure url="images/image67.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Shĭlhné'ohlĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>In this plate is pictured the second dry-painting employed in the Night Chant, made on
the sixth day of the ceremony. It represents crossed logs which whirl around in a mythic lake.
Upon them are alternately seated male and female deities, singing. The light figures are
goddesses, <hi rend="font-style: italic">haschĕbaád</hi>; the dark ones gods, <hi rend="font-style: italic">haschĕbakú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi>. Their songs treat of all life-giving
plants, of which corn, beans, squashes, and tobacco, the most important, are pictured as growing
from the very centre of the lake, the point of contact of the logs.</p>

<p>Of the four marginal figures the one in white toward the east is Hasché̆ltĭ, Talking God,
with his pine-squirrel pouch of sacred meal. Opposite him stands Haschógan, House God.
The other two are Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askí̆dĭl, Hunchbacks, Gods of Harvest, with seeds of the field in
packs on their backs. Around the whole is the personified rainbow.</p>

<p>When the dry-painting is in actual use the patient enters upon it over the feet of
Hasché̆ltĭ and sits at the intersection of the logs. A man personating a god then enters,
places his hands upon the various parts of the many deities represented in the picture, then
upon the corresponding parts of the patient's body. The whole picture is then destroyed
and the colored sands are carried off to the north in a blanket and strewn under trees.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Shĭlhné'ohlĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sixth Day</hi>: This is the first day of the large dry-paintings.
The painting is commenced early in the morning, and is not
finished until mid-afternoon. The one on this day is the whirling
log representation. After it is finished, feathers are stuck
in the ground around it, and sacred meal is scattered on parts
by some of the assisting singers. Others scatter the meal promiscuously;
one of the maskers uses a spruce twig and medicine
shell, applying meal to every figure and object in the painting.
Then the medicine-men all gather up portions of the sacred
meal, putting it in their medicine pouches. The patient soon
enters and takes his seat in the centre of the painting. The
usual incantations are gone through, after which the colored
sands of the painting are applied to the corresponding parts of
the patient's body, then gathered up and carried off to the north.
During the day two sets of beggars go out to the neighboring
hogáns. These personate Hasché̆ltĭ, Tónenĭlĭ—Water Sprinkler,
the God of Water, who is really a clown—and as many Haschĕbaád
as care to go out. The beggars carry whips made of yucca<pb n="121" /><anchor id="Pg121" />
leaves, and one who does not respond to their appeals for gifts
is whipped,—if he can be caught,—which creates a great deal
of amusement. The personators act like a company of clowns,
but at the same time they gather a large quantity of food. When
the day is thoroughly taken up with dry-painting and ceremonies,
there is less of the ceremonial at night. The medicine-men, to
the accompaniment of the basket drum, sing for a short time
only on this sixth night, while outside the late evening is spent
in dancing by those who are later to participate in the closing
dance.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Seventh Day</hi>: This day is practically consumed with the
making of another large dry-painting. The masked men go out
on another begging tour, also, and the medicine ceremonies and
the destroying of the dry-painting are practically the same as
those of the day before, while during the evening the medicine-men
sing to the accompaniment of the drum.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Eighth Day</hi>: The dry-painting is finished about three o'clock
in the afternoon. After its completion there is a large open-air
initiation. To become a full member of the Yébĭchai order one
must first be initiated in the hogán; the second initiation is a
public one; the third, another inside the hogán; the fourth,
another in the open. These different initiation ceremonies, the
same in point of ritualism, may be carried over several years.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ninth and Final Day</hi>: To the average person and to the
Indians as a whole the last day is the Yébĭchai dance. From<pb n="122" /><anchor id="Pg122" />
a distance the Indians have been gathering during the two previous
days, and the hospitality of the patient's family, as well as
that of all the people living in the neighboring hogáns, is taxed
to the utmost. And from early morning until dark the whole
plain is dotted with horsemen coming singly and in groups.
Great crowds gather at the contests given half a mile from the
hogán, where horse-races, foot-races, groups of gamblers, and
throngs of Indians riding wildly from race-track to hogán fill the
day with hilarity and incidents memorable to all. Toward the
end of the day preparation is made for the closing part of the nine-day
rite. Great quantities of fuel have been brought from the
distant plateau, and placed in many small piles at each side of the
smooth dance ground to the east of the hogán. As soon as it is
dark the fuel is ignited, making two long lines of camp-fires, furnishing
both light to see the dancers and warmth to the spectators,
for the Yébĭchai cannot be held until the autumn frosts
begin, when the nights have the sharp, keen air of the high
altitudes.</p>

<figure url="images/image68.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1907 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<p>This is the last of the dry-paintings used in the Night Chant, being destroyed on the
night of the eighth day's ceremonies. It takes its name from the fact that the principal characters
represented in it, the dark figures, are all Zahadolzhá, Fringe-mouth Gods. According to the
myth underlying the rite these gods made the first paintings of this sort used among the spirit
people, and were the ones who furnished succor to the patients on the eighth day of the nine
days' healing ceremony. The light figures are female deities—haschĕbaád. In the centre is
the cornstalk, a life-giving symbol, and partially encircling the whole is the personified light-giving
rainbow, a female personage.</p>

<p>During the ceremony a man masked as a Zahadolzhá places his hands first upon a part of
his likeness pictured in colored earths and then on the corresponding part of the patient, as head,
body, and limbs. Later the colored earths or sands are carried away in a blanket and placed
under brush or trees toward the north.</p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>With the gathering darkness the human tide flows toward
the medicine hogán, illuminated in the dusk by the long lines
of camp-fires. All gather about and close around the dance
square, having to be kept back by those in charge. Men,
women, and children sit on the ground near the fires. Many
on horseback have ridden up, and form a veritable phalanx back
of the sitting spectators. The dance does not begin at once, and
those assembled spend the time telling stories, jesting, and gossiping.
Belated arrivals make coffee, or do hurried cooking around
the fires.</p>

<p>Some distance to the east of the dance ground is a brush
enclosure where the dancers prepare for their part in the rite.
There, too, is a fire for light and warmth. The men in preparation
remove all clothing, save short kilts, and paint their bodies
with a mixture of water and white clay. Anyone who may have
experienced the enjoyment of a sponge bath out in the open on
a cold, windy night can appreciate the pleasure of the dance
preparation. The dancers are impersonators of Navaho myth<pb n="123" /><anchor id="Pg123" />
characters, twelve usually taking part. No qualifications are
necessary other than that the participant be conversant with the
intricate ritual of the dance. The dance continues throughout
the entire night, one group of men being followed by another.
The first twelve men dance through four songs, retiring to the
dressing enclosure for a very brief rest after each. Then they
withdraw, and twelve others dance for a like period, and so on.
The first group sometimes returns again later, and the different
groups vie with one another in their efforts to give the most
beautiful dance in harmony of movement and song, but there
is no change in the step. The several sets have doubtless trained
for weeks, and the most graceful take great pride in being pronounced
the best dancers. The first group of grotesquely masked
men is ready by nine or ten o'clock; they file into the dance
enclosure led by Hasché̆ltĭ, their naked, clay-painted bodies glinting
in the firelight. While wearing masks the performers never
speak in words; they only sing or chant. To address one in
conversation would incur the displeasure of the gods and invite
disaster. Time is kept by the basket drum and the rhythm
of the singing.</p>

<p>The white visitor will get his best impression of the dance
from a short distance, and, if possible, a slight elevation. There
he is in touch with the stillness of the night under the starry sky,
and sees before him, in this little spot lighted out of the limitless
desert, this strange ceremonial of supplication and thanksgiving,
showing slight, if any, change from the same performance,
held on perhaps the same spot by the ancestors of these people<pb n="124" /><anchor id="Pg124" />
ages ago. As the night wears on the best group of dancers
come out. They are, perhaps, from the Redrock country, or
from some other far-away district, and have been practising for
weeks, that they might excel in this dance. The most revered
song of the Yébĭchai is the Bluebird song, which is sung at the
approach of day, and is the closing act of the drama. With
the last words, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Dóla anyí, dóla anyí</hi>," the assembled multitude
start for their homes, near and far, melting into the gray of the
desert morn, and by the time the sun breaks above the horizon
the spot which was alive with people a few hours before is
wrapped in death-like stillness, not a soul being within range of
the eye.</p>

<figure url="images/image69.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yébĭchai Hogán</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Yébĭchai Hogán</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MATURITY CEREMONY</head>

<p>The ceremony celebrating maturity of girls among the
Navaho is held generally on the fourth night after the first evidence
of the maiden's entrance into womanhood. On the first
morning following the moment of this change in life the girl
bathes and dresses in her finest clothes. Later she stretches herself
face downward on a blanket just outside the hogán, with her
head toward the door. A sister, aunt, or other female relation,
if any happen to be close at hand, or if not, a male relative other
than her father, then proceeds symbolically to remould her. Her
arms and legs are straightened, her joints smoothed, and muscles
pressed to make her truly shapely. After that the most industrious
and energetic of the comely women in the immediate
neighborhood is called in to dress the girl's hair in a particular
form of knot and wrap it with deerskin strings, called <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsĭklólh</hi>.
Should there be any babies or little tots about the home, the girl
goes to them, and, placing a hand under each ear, successively
lifts them by the neck, to make them grow faster. Then she
darts off toward the east, running out for about a quarter of a
mile and back. This she does each morning until after the
public ceremony. By so doing she is assured of continuing
strong, lithe, and active throughout womanhood.</p>

<pb n="125" /><anchor id="Pg125" />

<p>The four days preceding the night of the ceremony are days
of abstinence; only such foods as mush and bread made from
corn-meal may be eaten, nor may they contain any salt. To
indulge in viands of a richer nature would be to invite laziness
and an ugly form at a comparatively early age. The girl must
also refrain from scratching her head or body, for marks made by
her nails during this period would surely become ill-looking scars.
All the women folk in the hogán begin grinding corn on the first
day and continue at irregular intervals until the night of the third,
when the meal is mixed into batter for a large corn-cake, which
the mother bakes in a sort of bean-hole outside the hogán.</p>

<p>The ceremony proper consists of little more than songs. A
medicine-man is called upon to take charge, being compensated
for his services with blankets, robes, grain, or other articles of
value. Friends and neighbors having been notified, they assemble
at the girl's hogán fairly early in the evening. When dusk has
settled, the medicine-man begins his songs, singing first the
twelve "hogán songs" of the Bahózhonchi. After he has finished,
anyone present who so desires may sing songs taken from
the ritual of the same order. This motley singing and hilarity
continue until well toward sunrise, when the mother brings in a
bowl of yucca suds and washes the girl's hair. Her head and
hair are dried with corn-meal, after which the girl takes her last
run toward the east, this time followed by many young children,
symbolically attesting that she will be a kind mother, whom her
children will always follow. The <hi rend="font-style: italic">hatálĭ</hi>, or medicine singer,
during her absence sings eight songs, generally termed the Racing
songs. On her return the great corn-cake is brought in, cut, and
divided among the assemblage, when all disperse, and the girl may
once more loosen her hair and partake of any food she pleases.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>MARRIAGE</head>

<figure url="images/image70.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yébĭchai</hi> Dancers - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Yébĭchai</hi> Dancers - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>The Navaho marriage ceremony is always held at the home of
the girl. When a young man wishes to marry the maid of his
choice, he makes his desire known to his parents, when the father<pb n="126" /><anchor id="Pg126" />
goes to the girl's parents and explains that his son would like to
marry their daughter. The girl is then consulted, and if she be
willing to marry the young man, the parents of the two open
negotiations. A popular, pretty girl commands a considerably
higher price than a plain one, though few are married for a
smaller bonus than fourteen ponies and a silver belt. Horses,
saddles, cattle, sheep and goats, and turquoise-studded silver ornaments
are the usual media of exchange in matrimonial bargains.
The arrangement of compensatory details, particularly the date of
delivery of the articles for payment, often requires a considerable
period of time and no little controversy. When finally completed,
the date is set for the wedding, which takes place always
at night.</p>

<p>The girl's mother fills a wedding basket with corn-meal
mush, which figures prominently in the ceremony. About nine
o'clock in the evening the wedding party assembles. Anyone
may attend, and usually a goodly number is present. The young
man and his bride take seats on the western side of the hogán,
facing the doorway. On their right the male spectators sit in
rows; on their left, the women. The girl's mother, however,
does not enter, for a mother-in-law, even in the making, must
not look upon her newly acquired son, nor he upon her, then or
thereafter. To do so would occasion blindness, and general ill
luck to either one or both parties.</p>

<p>The basket of mush and two wicker bottles of water are
brought in and placed before the couple, the bearer being careful
to see that the side of the basket on which the top coil terminates
is toward the east. The girl's father then steps forward, and from
his pouch of <hi rend="font-style: italic">tádĭtĭn</hi>, or sacred pollen, sifts several pinches on the
basket of mush. Beginning at the end of the coil on the eastern
rim, he sifts straight across and back, then follows the rim with
the pollen around to the south side, sifts across and back, and then
drops a little in the centre. That done, the bride pours a small
quantity of water from the wicker bottle upon the young man's
hands. He washes and pours a little upon hers. Then from
the side of the basket toward the east he dips out a little mush<pb n="127" /><anchor id="Pg127" />
with two fingers and eats. The girl follows, dipping from the
same place. This act is repeated at the three remaining sides—the
south, west, and north,—and then the basket is passed to the
assemblage, who finish eating its contents. The empty basket
becomes the property of the young man's mother, who retains it
as a sort of certificate of marriage. The washing of hands and
the dipping of mush from the same spot is a pledge that the
girl will follow in her husband's footsteps—doing as he does.</p>

<p>When the ceremony is concluded, a supper is provided for all.
General conversation and levity while away the hours, the talk
consisting principally, however, of sage advice from relatives to
both husband and wife as to how they should conduct themselves
in future. At dawn the party disperses, the young man taking
his bride with him.</p>

<figure url="images/image71.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Mescal Harvest - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Mescal Harvest - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<pb n="129" /><anchor id="Pg129" />
<head>APPENDIX</head>

<figure url="images/image72.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>White River Valley - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1903 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: White River Valley - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<pb n="131" /><anchor id="Pg131" />

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>TRIBAL SUMMARY - THE APACHE</head>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Language</hi>—Athapascan.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Population</hi>—Fort Apache Agency, Arizona (White Mountain Apache), 2,072.<lb />
            San Carlos Agency: San Carlos Apache, 1,066; Tonto Apache, 554; Coyoteros, 525.<lb />
            Tonto Apache on Beaver Creek, 103.<lb />
            Total Apache of Arizona (not including the so-called Mohave Apache and Yuma Apache), 4,320.<lb />
            Mescaleros in New Mexico, 460. Jicarillas in New Mexico, 784.<lb />
            Chiricahua Apache at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, 298. Kiowa Apache in Oklahoma, 155.<lb />
            Grand total of Apache tribes, 6,017.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dress</hi>—The primitive dress of the men was deerskin shirt (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ĕpŭntltésĭs</hi>), leggings (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ĭsklé̆tlĭkai</hi>),
and moccasins (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ĕpú̆nkĕ</hi>). They were never without the loin-cloth, the one absolutely necessary
feature of Indian dress. A deerskin cap (<hi rend="font-style: italic">cha</hi>), with attractive symbolic ornamentation, was
worn; but for the greater part the headgear consisted of a band braided from the long leaves of
the yucca, which they placed rather low on the head to keep the hair from the eyes. The
dress of the Apache women consisted of a short deerskin skirt, high boot-legged moccasins, and
a loose waist which extended to the hips and was worn outside the skirt. Both skirt and waist
were ornamented with deerskin fringe and latterly with metal pendants. The men's hair always
hangs loose; it is never braided. At time of mourning the hair is cut horizontally just above
the shoulder line. Apache matrons, like the men, do not braid the hair, but let it hang loosely
over the shoulders. The maidens tie their hair in a low long knot at the back of the head,
to which is fastened a decorated deerskin ornament, denoting maidenhood. So arranged it is
called <hi rend="font-style: italic">pĭtsĭvé̆sti</hi>, and the wrapping, <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsĭgé̆</hi>.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dwellings</hi>—The Apache dwelling consists of a dome-shaped frame of cottonwood or
other poles, thatched with grass. Average diameter at the base, twelve feet. The house itself
they term <hi rend="font-style: italic">kówa</hi>; the grass thatch, <hi rend="font-style: italic">pi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi>. Bear-grass, or what the Spanish term <hi rend="font-style: italic">palmillo</hi>, is used
exclusively in thatching. Since the institution of the Messiah religion the houses are built rather
elongate in form, with a doorway in each end, and all the houses of the village are arranged in
long rows. Doorways are termed <hi rend="font-style: italic">dáitin</hi>, or <hi rend="font-style: italic">chogúntĭ</hi>, interchangeably. Summer houses are
generally built at a distance from the winter houses, in fact wherever the Apache would have
occasion to stop, and are little more than brush shelters to afford temporary shade.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Primitive Foods</hi>—No tribe is more capable of living on the natural products of their pristine
haunts than the Apache. Whether allowed to live peacefully in the river valleys or driven
in war to seek protection of impenetrable mountains, nature provided amply for their support;
for practically all the flora and fauna indigenous to the Southwest are considered food by the
Apache. (See the list in the vocabulary.)</p>

<pb n="132" /><anchor id="Pg132" />

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Arts and Industries</hi>—The art expression of the Apache is manifested chiefly in their
basketry, which shows much taste in form and decoration. The <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>, an urn-shaped water
bottle, is loosely woven of the stems of aromatic sumac, then coated inside and out with piñon
gum. The flat tray basket, called <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsa-naskú̆dĭ</hi>, is much used in their domestic life. The most
pretentious basket is the immense <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus-naskú̆di</hi>, urn-shaped, like the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tus</hi>—whence its name—and
used principally for the storage of grain. No Apache home is without the burden basket,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">tú̆tza</hi>, round and deep, often somewhat conical in form, and invariably decorated with deerskin
fringe.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Political Organization</hi>—The Apache never had a very stable form of government.
Chiefs were elected, or chosen, and ruled so long as it pleased their followers. If the son of a
chief proved himself capable, he would be accorded opportunity to rule, otherwise he received
no special recognition. Medicine-men were always more influential than the chiefs. Social
customs and habits and much of the government of the tribe are guided by the medicine-men;
but often they lose all influence by meeting with failure in the treatment of disease. Like the
chiefs, the medicine-men depend on popular approval for their success.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clans</hi>—The Coyoteros are divided into five bands, each consisting of a number of clans.
In one band there are survivors of one clan only; in other bands as many as seven or eight
clans are yet to be found. Descent is reckoned through the mother; that is, the children belong
to the mother's clan, except among the Chiricahua, where, it is said, descent is traced through
the father.</p>

<figure url="images/image73.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nalin Lage</hi> - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Nalin Lage</hi> - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Coyotero Clans</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Band</hi> I</p>

<list type="ordered">
<item>Tse Chin (Red Rocks).</item>
<item>Glĕsh Chin (Red Clay).</item>
<item>Dĕs Káĭn (Cottonwood People).</item>
<item>Nú̆gwŭ Dĭlhkízn (Between Two Mountains).</item>
<item>Dĕs Lántin (Where the Cottonwoods Meet).</item>
<item>Kai Hi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Chin (Through the Willows).</item>
<item>Kestéchi Nádakĭn (Ford between Sycamores).</item>
</list>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Band</hi> II</p>

<list type="ordered">
<item>Klúqa Dĭ Káĭn (Many-reeds People).</item>
<item>Ĭl Chĕn Tĭá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Long Row of Pines).</item>
<item>Chénche Chichíl Káĭn (Clump-of-oaks People).</item>
<item>Tzĭlh Ádĭn (By the Mountain).</item>
<item>Yakúĭ Káĭn (White-hill People).</item>
</list>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Band</hi> III</p>

<list type="ordered">
<item>Ia O<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Yĕ (In Black Brush).</item>
<item>Ta Káĭn (Sand People).</item>
<item>Tĕntolzú̆ga (Juts into the Water).</item>
<item>Dosh To A<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Many Flies).</item>
<item>Tse Dĕs Káĭn (White-rock People).</item>
<item>Tse Teú̆n (Rocks in the River).</item>
<item>Tu Dĭlhkí̆h Shan (By the Black Water).</item>
<item>Ke Shĭn Tĭá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Long Row of Sycamores).</item>
</list>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Band</hi> IV</p>

<list type="ordered">
<item>Ndĕ Ndé̆zn (Tall People).</item>
</list>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Band</hi> V</p>

<list type="ordered">
<item>Nádotz Ózn (By Sharp Mountains).</item>
<item>Pĭs A Hó<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Bank Caved In).</item>
</list>

<pb n="133" /><anchor id="Pg133" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Arivaipa Clans</hi></p>

<list type="ordered">
<item>Glĕsh Chin (Red Clay).</item>
<item>Dĕs Zepú̆n (Big Gray Cottonwoods).</item>
<item>Tsĕz Zhuné̆ (By the Little Black Rocks).</item>
<item>Tse Dĕs Káĭn (White-rock People).</item>
</list>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chiricahua Clans</hi></p>

<list type="ordered">
<item>Aiahá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (People of the East).</item>
<item>Ndĕ Ndái (Apache Half Mexican).</item>
<item>Cho Kŭné̆ (Ridge on the Mountain-side).</item>
<item>Cha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Red People).</item>
</list>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marriage</hi>—Strictly speaking, barter for women at an agreed price was never the custom
among the Apache,—so the older of the present generation contend,—personal choice on the
part of the girl having always to be considered. Nevertheless, payment for the bride is always
made to her parents in the form of grain, money, horses, saddles, blankets, or cattle. The
bride's consent is necessary, custom requiring the young man to prove his moral strength, and
ability to support a wife and himself, by erecting a neat house and permitting the girl of his
choice to occupy it with him for four nights without being molested or having her presence
observed. By preparing his breakfast the morning following the fourth night the girl acknowledges
her willingness to marry, and the agreement as to the definite payment her parents shall
receive may be made any time later. She then becomes the man's wife, though a month may
sometimes elapse before the agreement is sealed and the consequent payment made.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Genesis</hi>—In the unbroken darkness of the beginning of time appeared a small spot, which
grew as embryonic life and became a human figure, known in the myth as Kútĕrastan, The One
Who Lives Above. This creator then made light, and next Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Woman Without Parents.
Next he created Chuganaái, The Sun, and following him Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn, Pollen Boy. The
creator next made the earth, and then the other gods of the Apache pantheon. Following their
creation he instructed the various gods in their respective duties, and then disappeared into the
sky through the smoke from a miraculous fire.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Person of Miraculous Birth</hi>—Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, a goddess, is the mother of two boys, who
perform miracles and act as saviours of the people. The elder brother, Nayé̆nĕzganĭ, conceived
by the Sun, is the more active and is revered as the God of War. To Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ, conceived
by Water, is ascribed the making of the ocean as it now is, and he is supposed to have much
to do with water in the form of rain and snow.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ceremonies</hi>—The ceremonies are invariably called "dances." Among these are: a
rain dance, a puberty rite, a harvest or good-crop dance, and a spirit dance. The medicine
dance is the creation of a medicine-man and varies with his individual views. The ceremonial
paraphernalia of the other four dances may vary in accordance with the dictates of the medicine-man,
but for the greater part follows prescribed formula. The Apache are devoutly religious
and pray on many occasions and in various ways: sometimes with the aid of little images representing
gods, sometimes with painted deerskins and caps, and sometimes by merely facing the
cardinal points and scattering pollen to the four winds for the gods from whom they seek favor.
Usually the plants employed by them as medicine are dug in a ceremonial way, one notable
exception being the gathering of pollen, no prayers being offered at that time. In secluded
spots in the hills and mountains are found round cairns, with cedar and other twigs deposited
upon them. These are shrines at which the Apache make offerings to their favorite gods.
The medicine ceremonies are very numerous and vary with the dreams and personal views of
the medicine-man who conducts them.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Burial</hi>—Everywhere throughout the hills and mountains of the reservation one finds small
heaps of stones. In most instances these mark Apache graves. A favorite place of burial is a<pb n="134" /><anchor id="Pg134" />
cleft in the rocks, in which the body is placed by the deceased's relatives and covered with
stones. These small stones are always deposited one at a time, the Apache believing that to
put them on the body all at once would shorten the life of the one so doing. Infants are
usually placed on the upper branches of large cedar or piñon trees. The child is wrapped in
its carrier, or cradle-board, which is left face up and covered with any sort of cloth, the belief
being that the souls of infants are not strong enough to come out through the stones, should they
be placed in the ground and covered therewith.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">After-world</hi>—Re-created in the human form, Apache spirits are supposed to dwell in a
land of peace and plenty, where there is neither disease nor death. The Milky Way is the
path of all souls to the after-world. Yólkai Nalí̆n is the guardian goddess of this spirit land,
and the spirits of the dead are supposed to journey four days before reaching it. Formerly
horses were killed beside the grave of the dead, that they might use them in the after-world.
For the same reason wearing apparel was also placed at the grave, together with available articles
of adornment and accoutrement.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Names for Indian Tribes</hi>—</p>

<p>Apache - Ndĕ (The People)</p>
<p>Arivaipa Apache - Chulĭnné̆</p>
<p>Chiricahua Apache - Aiahá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (People of the East)</p>
<p>Coyotero Apache - Klĭnápaha (Many Travel Together)</p>
<p>Havasupai - Dĕzhí̆piklakŭlh (Women Dress in Bark)</p>
<p>Hopi - Tsekŭlkĭnné̆ (Houses on the Rocks)</p>
<p>Navaho - Yutahá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Live Far Up)</p>
<p>Northern Indians - Nda Yutahá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (White-man Navaho)</p>
<p>Pima - Saikĭnné̆ (Sand Houses)</p>
<p>Rio Grande Pueblos - Tu Tlú̆nĭ (Much Water)</p>
<p>San Carlos Apache - Tseénlĭn (Between Rocks)</p>
<p>Tonto Apache - Dĭlzhá̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Spatter-talkers), or Koún (Rough)</p>
<p>Zuñi - Nashtĭzhé̆ (Blackened Eyebrows)</p>

<figure url="images/image74.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Infant Burial - Apache</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Infant Burial - Apache</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE JICARILLAS</head>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Language</hi>—Athapascan.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Population</hi>—784.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dress</hi>—The Jicarillas in dress show the effect of their contact with the Plains tribes, especially
the Ute. The primitive dress of the men was a deerskin shirt with sleeves, hip-leggings
and moccasins, and the universal loin-cloth. In winter a large loose deerskin coat was worn
in addition. The women wore a waist open at the sides under the arms, a deerskin skirt falling
below the knees, and legging-moccasins with very high tops. About the waist the women
now also wear a very broad leather belt, ten to sixteen inches in width, extending well up
under the arms. The men wear their hair in braids hanging over the shoulders and wound
with strips of deerskin. Formerly they wore bangs in front on a line with the cheek-bones and
tied their hair in a knot at the back of the head, as the Navaho and the Pueblo Indians do. The
women part their hair down the middle, bring it to the sides of the head, and tie it with strips
of deerskin, cloth, or yarn.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dwellings</hi>—The Jicarilla dwelling is the same as the tipi of the Plains Indians, once made
of five buffalo skins on the usual framework of poles, with smoke-hole at the apex. Since the
disappearance of the buffalo, canvas has replaced the skins, and many log houses are also to be
found on the reservation. The native house is called <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Primitive Foods</hi>—The Jicarillas obtain corn from Rio Grande Pueblos in exchange for
baskets; but formerly they subsisted mainly by the chase, killing buffalo, deer, antelope, and<pb n="135" /><anchor id="Pg135" />
mountain sheep, besides many kinds of small game and birds. Piñon nuts and acorns, with
various wild fruits and berries, were used. Bear and fish were never eaten.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Arts and Industries</hi>—The Jicarillas make a great many baskets of fair quality, from
which industry the tribe gained its popular Spanish name. The most typical of their baskets
is tray-shaped; this not only enters largely into their domestic life, but was formerly the principal
article of barter with their Pueblo neighbors and Navaho kindred. Some pottery is made,
practically all of which is in the form of small cooking utensils. The large clay water jar was
not used, their wandering life necessitating a water carrier of greater stability.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Organization</hi>—While the government of the Jicarillas is very loose, the head-chief,
selected from the family of his predecessor, exercises considerable influence. The two bands
into which the tribe is divided had their origin when a part of the tribe remained for a period
on the plains after an annual buffalo hunt, and henceforth were called Kohlkahí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Plains People;
while those who returned to the mountains received the name Sait Ndĕ, Sand People, from the
pottery they made. Each of the two bands has a sub-chief. There are no clans.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marriage</hi>—Marriage is consummated only by consent of the girl's parents. The young
man proves his worth by bringing to her family a quantity of game, and by building a <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi>,
which is consecrated on the night of the wedding, by a medicine-man, with prayers to
Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Origin</hi>—People, existent with the beginning of time, are guided by Chunnaái, the Sun
God, and Klĕnaái, the Moon God, out of an under-world into this, where the various tribes
wander about and find their several homes.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Persons of Miraculous Birth</hi>—Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ, son of the virgin Yólkai Ĕstsán and the
Sun, and Kobadjischínĭ, son of Ĕstsán Nátlĕshĭn and Water, perform many wonders in ridding the
earth of its monsters. The former was the more powerful and much mythology centres about him.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ceremonies</hi>—The Girls' Maturity observance, an annual feast whose main features are
borrowed from the Pueblos, and a four-days medicine rite are the principal ceremonies of the
Jicarillas. Numerous less important medicine chants are held.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Burial</hi>—The dead, accompanied with their personal possessions, are taken to elevated
places and covered with brush and stones. Their situation is known to only the few who bear
the body away. Formerly the favorite horse of the deceased was killed and the <hi rend="font-style: italic">kozhán</hi> burned,
and relatives frequently cut their hair and refrained for a time from personal adornment.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">After-world</hi>—When the good die their spirits are believed to go to a home of plenty
in the sky, where they hunt among great herds of buffalo. Those who have practised "bad
medicine," or sorcery, go to another part of the sky and spend eternity in vain effort to dig
through the rock into the land of the good.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Names for Indian Tribes</hi>—</p>

<p>Apache<lb />
Mohave<lb />
Yuma<lb />
Pima</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">Chishín (Red Paint)</p>

<p>Comanche<lb />
Arapaho<lb />
Kiowa and all Plains tribes</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">Nda (Enemies)</p>

<p>Jicarillas - Haísndayĭn (People Who Came from Below)</p>

<p>Mescaleros - Natahí̆n (Mescal)</p>

<p>Navaho - Inltané̆ (Corn Planters)</p>

<p>Pueblos - Chĭáin (Have Burros)</p>

<p>Ute - Yóta</p>
</div>

<pb n="136" /><anchor id="Pg136" />

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE NAVAHO</head>

<figure url="images/image75.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Language</hi>—Athapascan.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Population</hi>—About 17,000 (officially estimated at 20,600).</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dress</hi>—Primitively the men dressed in deerskin shirts, hip-leggings, moccasins, and native
blankets. These were superseded by what has been the more universal costume during the
present generation: close-fitting cotton or velvet shirt, without collar, cut rather low about the
neck and left open under the arms; breeches fashioned from any pleasing, but usually very thin,
material, and extending below the knees, being left open at the outer sides from the bottom to
a little above the knees; deerskin moccasins with rawhide soles, which come to a little above
the ankles, and brown deerskin leggings from moccasin-top to knee, held in place at the knee
by a woven garter wound several times around the leg and the end tucked in. The hair is
held back from the eyes by a head-band tied in a knot at the back. In early times the women
wore deerskin waist, skirt, moccasins, and blanket, but these gradually gave place to the
so-called "squaw-dress," woven on the blanket loom, and consisting of two small blankets
laced together at the sides, leaving arm-holes, and without being closed at top or bottom. The
top then was laced together, leaving an opening for the head, like a poncho. This blanket-dress
was of plain dark colors. To-day it has practically disappeared as an article of Navaho costume,
the typical "best" dress of the women now consisting of a velvet or other cloth skirt reaching
to the ankles, a velvet shirt-like waist cut in practically the same manner as that of the men,
and also left open under the arms. Many silver and shell ornaments are worn by both sexes.
The women part their hair down the middle and tie it in a knot at the back.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dwellings</hi>—Whatever its form or stability, the Navaho house is called <hi rend="font-style: italic">hogán</hi>. In its
most substantial form it is constructed by first planting four heavy crotch posts in the ground;
cross logs are placed in the crotches, and smaller ones are leaned from the ground to these, the
corner logs being longer, forming a circular framework, which is covered with brush and a
heavy coating of earth. The entrance is invariably at the east. The building of a hogán and
its first occupancy are attended with ceremony and prayer. For the great nine-day rites hogáns
like those used as dwellings, but larger, are built. Generally they are used for the one occasion
only, but in localities where there are very few trees the same ceremonial hogán may be
used for a generation or more. For summer use a brush shelter, usually supported by four
corner posts and sometimes protected by a windbreak, is invariably used, supplanting a once
common single slant shelter.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Primitive Foods</hi>—See the list in the vocabulary.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Arts and Industries</hi>—The Navaho are known the world over for their skill in weaving.
Practically every Navaho woman is a weaver, and the blanketry produced is one of the most
important handicrafts of any tribe of North American Indians. A few baskets, of a single form,
are made, and for ceremonial use only, most so-called Navaho ceremonial baskets being manufactured
by neighboring tribes. The Navaho are also skilful silversmiths, having learned the
art of metal-working from the Spaniards. Their first work of this character, however, was in
iron, but this was superseded by the more easily worked silver. Some pottery is made, but it
is rather crude in form, black in color, and without decoration.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Political Organization</hi>—The government of the Navaho is rather loose; indeed, inasmuch
as they have no head-chief strictly such, it may be said that they have no <hi rend="font-style: italic">tribal</hi> government.
Their code of ethics and morals is governed almost entirely by their religious beliefs.
There is always a man who is denominated the head-chief, but his influence is seldom much
greater than that of any one of the many subordinate chiefs who are the recognized heads of
small groups only.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clans</hi>—Descent is reckoned through the mother, and a man and a woman belonging to the
same clan may not marry. There are also related clans, forming phratries, within which marriage<pb n="137" /><anchor id="Pg137" />
is also prohibited by tribal custom. In the Navaho creation myth it is related that four
pairs of men and women were made by Yólkai Ĕstsán at her home beyond the western ocean,
whence they migrated eastward, far inland, joining others of their kind created but a short time
previously. Each parent pair was given a sacred jewel wand with which to bring water from
the earth if no springs were found during the journey. The first man brought water with ease,
remarking, "The water is close," owing to which circumstance he came to be termed To
Ahánĭ, Water Is Close. In a similar way the other three pairs received the names of To
Dĭchínĭ, Bitter Water; Hashklí̆shnĭ, Mud; and Kĭnya Ánĭ, Houses in the Cliffs. It required
four days to make the journey from the ocean to what was to be their homeland. On the first
day children were born to the several pairs; they matured by nightfall and camped apart from
the parents as though they were not of kin, and received in turn a family name derived from
their camp surroundings, from peculiarity of dress or form, or from remarks they made. These
in turn bore children on the following day, who gave birth to others on the third. Thus were
produced three new generations from each parent pair. All these then became clanship groups
bearing names now applied to various Navaho clans. The four generations, including the
original pairs, formed phratries, which have no names. The clans in each phratry in the
order of generations are as follows:</p>

<p>To Ahánĭ - Water Is Close<lb />
Tzĭlh Klaánĭ - Mountain Corner<lb />
Tánĕ Zánĭ - Scattered Mounds<lb />
Hónĕ Gánĭ - Goes Around</p>

<p>To Dĭchínĭ - Bitter Water<lb />
Tsĭns Akánĭ - Under the Trees<lb />
Bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Bĕtónĭ - Deer Spring<lb />
To Dákoshĕ - Salty Water</p>

<p>Hashklí̆shnĭ - Mud<lb />
To Tsú̆hnĭ - Big Water<lb />
Bĭtánĭ - Folds her Arms<lb />
Hlúha Dĭné̆ - Reed People</p>

<p>Kí̆nya Ánĭ - Houses in the Cliffs<lb />
Bĕ Aánĭ - Fallen Leaves<lb />
Tzĭlh Tad - In Front of the Mountains<lb />
Kí̆nya Ánĭ - (An inferior clan of the same name as the first of this group)</p>

<p>Cliff people already occupying the country formed three clans: Tsĕnĭjĭkĭnné̆, In the Rock
Houses; To Hĕt Klí̆nĭ, Where the Waters Come Together; and Tzĭlhnúhodĭnlĭ, Beside
the Mountain. An old woman joined the Navaho from the salt lakes to the south, heading
the Ashĭhín clan. People from Jemez formed the Mai Dĕshkís, or Coyote Pass, clan; Apache
from the Cibicu cañon, the Dĕschínĭ clan, or Red-light People, and families from Zuñi the
Nashtĕzhé̆, Blackened Eyebrows, clan, and Tŭh'chínĭ, Red Heads, clan, so called from their
painted faces and bodies. There are numerous other clanship groups derived from adopted
peoples now recognized as being distinctly Navaho; the first sixteen clans here named are
accepted in the tribe as being strictly Navaho in origin.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marriage</hi>—The girl's consent is necessary to marriage, but tribal custom demands that
the intended husband compensate her parents, the usual price being fourteen horses and a silver
belt. Indeed, the bringing of the horses is a part of the ceremony. When a young man<pb n="138" /><anchor id="Pg138" />
desires to marry, but does not have the necessary number of horses, his friends aid him by presenting
horses until he has the required number. The marriage ceremony takes place at night
under the direction of a medicine-man.</p>

<figure url="images/image76.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ga<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭdĭ</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ga<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭdĭ</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Origin</hi>—Mythical First People produced from corn, rain, pollen, and precious stones in a
miraculous manner by four gods and the Winds.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Persons of Miraculous Birth</hi>—Nayé̆nĕzganĭ and Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ are the sons of the Sun
and Water respectively, and the virgin Yólkai Ĕstsán, White-Shell Woman. Man-destroying
monsters, symbolic of earthly evils, infested the earth until destroyed by these two miraculous
personages.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ceremonies</hi>—The Navaho life is particularly rich in ceremony and ritual, second only
to some of the Pueblo groups. Note is made of nine of their great nine-day ceremonies for the
treatment of ills, mental and physical. There are also many less important ceremonies occupying
four days, two days, and one day in their performance. In these ceremonies many dry-paintings,
or "sand altars," are made, depicting the characters and incidents of myths. Almost
every act of their life—the building of the hogán, the planting of crops, etc.—is ceremonial
in nature, each being attended with songs and prayers.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Burial</hi>—The Navaho dead are buried by others than immediate relatives in unmarked
graves. No ceremonies are held, for the dead are considered evil and are feared. The hogán
in which death occurs is forever abandoned, often burned. Sometimes a hogán is demolished
over the dead and then left to decay.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">After-world</hi>—An under-world whence came the spirit people who created man and to
which spirits return.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Names for Indian Tribes</hi>—</p>

<p>Acoma - Háqonĭ (An Acoma word)<lb />
Apache - Tzlĭh A Gó<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (On the Mountains)<lb />
Chiricahua - Klí̆shnĭ (Red War-paint)<lb />
Cochiti - To Gad (Cedar Water)<lb />
Comanche - Aná Tlú̆nĭ (Many Enemies)<lb />
Havasupaí - Gohní̆nĭ (A term borrowed from the Hopi)<lb />
Hopi - Ayá Kĭnné̆ (Hole Houses)<lb />
Isleta - Aná To Ho (Tribe by the Water)<lb />
Jemez - Mai Dĕshkís (Coyote Pass)<lb />
Laguna - To Tlú̆nĭ (Have much Water)<lb />
Mohave, Pima, Maricopa, Yuma, Papago - Bĕ Ĕsá Ntsái (With large Jars)<lb />
Navaho - Dĭné̆<lb />
Sandia - Kĭn Nodózĭ (Striped Houses)<lb />
San Felipe - To Háchĕle (Pull up Water)<lb />
San Ildefonso - Tsĕ Tŭ Kĭnné̆ (Houses between Rocks)<lb />
San Juan - Kĭn Klĕchínĭ (Red-house People)<lb />
Santa Clara - Ána Sú̆shĭ (Tribe like Bears—from skunkskin moccasins, first thought to be of bearskin)<lb />
Santo Domingo - Kĭn Klĕkái Nĭ (White Houses)<lb />
Sia - Tlógĭ (Hairy)<lb />
Taos - To Wolh (Water Gurgles)<lb />
Zuñi - Nashtĕzhé̆ (Blackened Eyebrows)</p>
</div>
</div>

<pb n="139" /><anchor id="Pg139" />


<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>SOUTHERN ATHAPASCAN COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY</head>

<p></p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Anatomical Terms</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ankle-joint</cell><cell>ko-ká̆ ĭlh-rŭ-nŭ-ni-wú</cell><cell>ké̆t-sin</cell><cell>a-ké̆ts-in</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>arm</cell><cell>ko-gún</cell><cell>gŏn</cell><cell>a-gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>blood</cell><cell>dĭlh</cell><cell>tí̆l-thĕ</cell><cell>dĭlh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>bone</cell><cell>its-í̆n</cell><cell>í̆ts-ĭn</cell><cell>ts'ĭn</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>chest</cell><cell>i-tí̆l</cell><cell>ko-yé̆-tĕ</cell><cell>a-jĕ-í̆ts-in</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>chin</cell><cell>ko-yé̆-dâ</cell><cell>ĭs-é̆-tâ</cell><cell>á̆-yăts-in</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ear</cell><cell>id-já</cell><cell>ĭd-já</cell><cell>ă-já</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>elbow</cell><cell>ko-gún ĭlh-rŭ-nŭ-ni-wú</cell><cell>ĭd-a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-hlá</cell><cell>osh-lé</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>eye</cell><cell>in-dá̆</cell><cell>ĭt-á</cell><cell>ăn-á<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>face</cell><cell>ko-ní</cell><cell>ĭn-ní</cell><cell>ăn-í<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>finger</cell><cell>ko-lụ-zhúzh</cell><cell>in-lấ</cell><cell>shĭ-lă</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>finger-nail</cell><cell>ko-lụ-gún</cell><cell>in-lâ-gó̆n</cell><cell>shĭ-lá̆sh-gâ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>foot</cell><cell>ko-ké̆</cell><cell>i-ká</cell><cell>kĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>hair</cell><cell>tsĭ-rấ</cell><cell>ĭt-sé̆</cell><cell>tsi-ghá̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>hand</cell><cell>ko-gún</cell><cell>u-lá</cell><cell>shí-lă</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>head</cell><cell>kots-its-í̆n</cell><cell>í̆ts-ĭts-ĭn</cell><cell>sí̆ts-ĭts-in</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>heart</cell><cell>kod-jí did-jú-la</cell><cell>ko-chá</cell><cell>a-je-id-í̆sh-jalh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>knee</cell><cell>ko-qút</cell><cell>ĭ-kó</cell><cell>ă-whód</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>leg</cell><cell>kod-jấk</cell><cell>ĭ-jấd</cell><cell>ă-jấd</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>lip</cell><cell>su-sŭ-bâ-né̆</cell><cell>ĭ-tấ</cell><cell>ă-dấ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>lungs</cell><cell>kod-jí</cell><cell>ĭ-tâ-lé̆</cell><cell>a-jé</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mouth</cell><cell>ko-zá</cell><cell>ĭ-zé̆</cell><cell>si-zé</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>neck</cell><cell>ko-gús</cell><cell>ĭ-kó̆s</cell><cell>ăk-ás</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>nose</cell><cell>ko-chí</cell><cell>ĭ-chí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>ă-chí̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>nostril</cell><cell>kó-ní̆</cell><cell>ĭn-né̆</cell><cell>ă-ní̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>shoulder</cell><cell>ko-hwás</cell><cell>ĭh-hwás</cell><cell>ă-hwás</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>toe</cell><cell>ko-kĕ-zhúzh</cell><cell>ĭh-ké̆sh</cell><cell>a-ké̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>toe-nail</cell><cell>ko-kĕ-gún</cell><cell>ĭh-ké̆sh-gŏn</cell><cell>a-ké̆sh-gâ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>tongue</cell><cell>kŏ-zá</cell><cell>ĭh-zá-tĕ</cell><cell>a-tsó</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>tooth</cell><cell>ko-wú</cell><cell>ĭh-gwó</cell><cell>a-hwó</cell>
</row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Animals</hi> (See also <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Foods</hi>)</head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>antelope</cell><cell>já-gĕ</cell><cell>tá-ga-tĕ</cell><cell>jú̆-dĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>badger</cell><cell>bụ-ntă-lé̆ na-ga<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>s-chi-tn</cell><cell>ná-as-chĭd</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>bat</cell><cell>cha-bâ-né̆</cell><cell>cha-na-mi-ín</cell><cell>jâ-a-bá-nĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>bear</cell><cell>sŭsh</cell><cell>shash</cell><cell>sŭsh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>beaver</cell><cell>cha</cell><cell>cha</cell><cell>cha</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>blue-bird</cell><cell>rụsh-tá du-tlí̆sh</cell><cell>dó-lo</cell><cell>dó-lĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>buffalo</cell><cell>bĭ-shĭsh-jík</cell><cell>ă-yán-dĕ</cell><cell>a-yá-nĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>buzzard</cell><cell>chi-shó-gĭ</cell><cell>ta-chá-ze</cell><cell>jé-sho</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>chipmunk</cell><cell>gụ-sụs-sí</cell><cell>ĭn-se-zú-so</cell><cell>tsĭd-í̆t-í̆-nĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>coyote</cell><cell>ba<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>tsil-i-té̆n</cell><cell>mai</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>crow</cell><cell>gấ-gĕ</cell><cell>kấ-gĕ</cell><cell>gấ-gĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>deer</cell><cell>bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>eagle</cell><cell>tsá-cho</cell><cell>i-tsá</cell><cell>a-tsá</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>elk</cell><cell>bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-nal-dé̆</cell><cell>tzĕs</cell><cell>tzĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>gopher</cell><cell>na-ilh-tlí-gi</cell><cell>ma-í-nĕ-li<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>na-a-zí-si</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>hawk</cell><cell>ĭt-sấ</cell><cell>ĭt-sé̆-so-yĕ g'í̆-ni</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mountain lion</cell><cell>ndú-chú</cell><cell>ĕn-tó-yĕ</cell><cell>nash-tu-í-tso</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mountain sheep</cell><cell>dĕ-bé̆-chụ zi-dĕ-bé̆</cell><cell>tsĕ-tú̆-dĕ-bĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>owl</cell><cell>bụ</cell><cell>yí-yĕ</cell><cell>nás-cha</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>rat (wood)</cell><cell>klósh-chụ</cell><cell>klé̆-tso</cell><cell>klĕ-é̆-tso</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>skunk</cell><cell>gụ-lízh-ĭ</cell><cell>kĕl-di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-shé̆n wo-lí̆-zhi</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>spider</cell><cell>na-alht-lo-lé̆</cell><cell>ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>s-ché̆</cell><cell>nash-jé'i</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>squirrel</cell><cell>tsĕ-skús-si</cell><cell>na-jĭl-kái-ĭ</cell><cell>t'lá-zi</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>turkey</cell><cell>tá-zhĭ</cell><cell>ká-zhĭ</cell><cell>tá-zhĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>wolf</cell><cell>ba<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-chú</cell><cell>bai-é̆-tso</cell><cell>mai-í̆-tso</cell>
</row>
</table>

<pb n="140" /><anchor id="Pg140" />

<figure url="images/image77.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi> - Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1904 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi> - Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Cardinal Points</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>north</cell><cell>nâ-ak-ku-sé̆ bi-yâ-yó</cell><cell>ná-ko-sŭ bi-ya-yé̆</cell><cell>nó̑-ho-kos</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>south</cell><cell>nụ-dĭt-ú̆ bi-yâ-yó</cell><cell>sha-tí ai-yé̆</cell><cell>shŭ-tŭ-ú̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>east</cell><cell>hụ-nâ-ĭt-ú̆kh bi-yâ-yó</cell><cell>sha-há ai-yé̆</cell><cell>há-ĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>west</cell><cell>on-ụd-ú̆kh bi-yâ-yó</cell><cell>sha-í ai-yé̆</cell><cell>i-yŭ-ú̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>zenith</cell><cell>nokh-gé̆h-yo</cell><cell></cell><cell>ya-alh-ní-gĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>nadir</cell><cell>nokh-tlúh-yo</cell><cell></cell><cell>a-yá-ĭ dĕs-á-ĭ-gĭ</cell>
</row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Colors</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>black</cell><cell>dí̆lh-kĭh</cell><cell>dí̆lh-ĭ-li</cell><cell>dí̆lh-kĭh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>blue</cell><cell>du-tlí̆sh-ĭ</cell><cell>dá-tlĭsh</cell><cell>do-tlí̆sh-ĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>brown</cell><cell>hĭsh-tlí̆zh</cell><cell>klĭ-pá</cell><cell>dí̆-nĭl-zhĭn</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>gray</cell><cell>qụl-bấ</cell><cell>tnĕ-ná-tlĭsh</cell><cell>klĕ-pá</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>green</cell><cell>tlŏh-du-tlí̆zh-a</cell><cell>yĕ-dá-tlĭsh</cell><cell>dó-tlĭsh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>red</cell><cell>tli-chú</cell><cell>klĭ-chí</cell><cell>klĕ-chí</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>white</cell><cell>tli-kái</cell><cell>klĭ-kái</cell><cell>klĕ-kái</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>yellow</cell><cell>tli-tsó</cell><cell>klĭ-tsó</cell><cell>klé̆-tso</cell>
</row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Foods (Primitive)</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>acorns</cell><cell>chĭd-jí̆l</cell><cell>na-tó-ka-tsĕ</cell><cell>ché̆-chĭl bi-ná</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>antelope</cell><cell>já-gĕ</cell><cell>ta-gá-tĕ</cell><cell>jú̆-dĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>beans (native)</cell><cell>bé̆s-tsoz</cell><cell>ná-o-hlĕ-tsos-tĕt</cell><cell>nú̆-o-hlĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>cedar berries</cell><cell>dĭl-tú-hla du-tlí̆sh-ĭ</cell><cell>kal-tú-stĕ-ih</cell><cell>dit-zé̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>corn</cell><cell>na-tá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>na-tá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>na-tá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>deer</cell><cell>bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>bi^{n)</cell><cell>bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>elk</cell><cell>bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> nal-dé̆</cell><cell>tzĕs</cell><cell>tzĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>grapes (wild)</cell><cell>dŭh-tsá</cell><cell>tŭt-zé̆</cell><cell>tŭt-zé̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>juniper berries</cell><cell>dĭl-tú-hla</cell><cell></cell><cell>chĭl-há-zhĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mescal (agave)</cell><cell>ná-ta</cell><cell>ná-ta</cell><cell>ná-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mountain sheep</cell><cell>dĕ-bé̆-chụ zi-dĕ-bé̆</cell><cell>tsĕ-tú̆-dĕ-bĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>piñon nuts</cell><cell>o-bé̆</cell><cell>nĕs-chí</cell><cell>nĕs-chí</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>potatoes (wild)</cell><cell>ĭlh-tsú si-tsí̆n-nĭ</cell><cell>pi-ji-né̆</cell><cell>ná-ma-si</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>prairie-dogs</cell><cell>ă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>klu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>klu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>pumpkins</cell><cell>bĕlh-kún</cell><cell>na-yí-zĕ</cell><cell>na-yĭ-zĭ-chí</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>rabbits (jack)</cell><cell>gah-chú</cell><cell>gah-tsó</cell><cell>gah-tsó</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>rabbits (cottontail)</cell><cell>gah-chi-lé̆</cell><cell>gah-chĭ-shé̆</cell><cell>gah</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>rats (wood)</cell><cell>klosh-chú</cell><cell>klé̆-tso</cell><cell>klĕ-é̆-tso</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>squash</cell><cell>gó-chi bĕlh-kún</cell><cell>na-yí-zĕ</cell><cell>na-yí̆-zĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>yucca fruit</cell><cell>gu-skú̆n</cell><cell>kash-kán</cell><cell>kŭsh-kán</cell>
</row>
</table>

<pb n="141" /><anchor id="Pg141" />


<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Handicraft</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>arrow-point</cell><cell>bĕsh-go-lí̆n</cell><cell>bé̆sh-tĕ</cell><cell>bes-ĕst-á-gi</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>arrow-shaft</cell><cell>tsĭ-gấ</cell><cell>kĭ-ĭsh-tlu-zé̆</cell><cell>ts'ak-á̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>basket (tray)</cell><cell>tsâ-nas-kú̆-dĭ ĭ-tsấ</cell><cell>ts'â</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>basket (burden)</cell><cell>tú̆t-za</cell><cell>ĭ-tsâ-nas-ká</cell><cell>tsi-zí̆s</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>bow</cell><cell>ĭlh-tí̆</cell><cell>ĭt-kĭn-chái</cell><cell>alht-hí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>cap</cell><cell>cha</cell><cell>cha</cell><cell>cha</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>deerskin</cell><cell>ĕ-pú̆n</cell><cell>ĕ-pú̆n</cell><cell>ĕ-pú̆n</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>fire-sticks</cell><cell>kóh-tĭl-di</cell><cell>t'tĕ</cell><cell>wolk-á<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>head-band</cell><cell>tsĭ-nóz-dĕ</cell><cell>tsi-náz-dĕ</cell><cell>cha</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>house</cell><cell>kó-wa</cell><cell>ko-zhán</cell><cell>ho-gán</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>leggings</cell><cell>ĭs-klé̆ tlĭ-kái</cell><cell>ĭs-klé̆</cell><cell>ĕ-pú̆n ĭs-klé̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>loin-cloth</cell><cell>chósh-ta</cell><cell>tsa-á-tĕ</cell><cell>t'lĕsts-ós</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>moccasins</cell><cell>ĕ-pú̆n kĕ</cell><cell>ké̆'it-zĕ</cell><cell>kĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>pottery</cell><cell>nụlh-kí-dĕ bi i-dé̆</cell><cell>ĭ-tsá̆ kush-tí̆sh</cell><cell></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>shirt</cell><cell>ĕ-pŭn-tlé-sĭs</cell><cell>é̆'it-zĕ</cell><cell>ĕ-pŭn'é̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>sweat-lodge</cell><cell>ka-ché̆</cell><cell>ké̆lh-cha</cell><cell>ta-ché̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>water bottle tus</cell><cell>kú<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-chĕ-ĕ</cell><cell>tó-zŭs</cell>
</row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Months (Moons)</hi><note place="foot"><p>Our months, of course, only approximate the moons of the Indians.</p></note></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>January</cell><cell>It-sá Bĭ-zhá̆zh</cell><cell>Ku-wan-dé̆</cell><cell>Yăs Nlht'es</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>February</cell><cell>Bụh Is-chí̆t</cell><cell>Is-sai-zá</cell><cell>A-tsá̆ Bĭ-yásh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>March</cell><cell>T'a Nụ-chí̆l</cell><cell>It-á-na Chĭ-tái</cell><cell>Wozhch'td</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>April</cell><cell>T'a Nụ-chú</cell><cell>It-á-na Tso</cell><cell>At-ấ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Chil</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>May</cell><cell>Shosh-ké̆</cell><cell>Ku-skí It-chí</cell><cell>At-ấ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Tso</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>June</cell><cell>Bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-nĭ-tsí̆ Dĭlh-tsí̆k</cell><cell>Tấ-gĕ It-chí</cell><cell>Nesh-já Chíl-i</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>July</cell><cell>Bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-nĭ-tsí̆ Chi-é̆</cell><cell>Bi It-chí</cell><cell>Nesh-já Tso</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>August</cell><cell>Bi-nĭ-tún Tsos-sé̆ Kĕ-tlĕ-pé̆ Lak-tái-kĕ Bĭnt-ấ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Ts'á<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-sĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>September</cell><cell>Bi-nĭ-t[ú.]n Chụ</cell><cell>It-ha-stĭ-kí̆h</cell><cell>Bĭnt-ấ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> Tso</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>October</cell><cell>Rấ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-zhĭ</cell><cell>Iz-té̆-o-ĕ</cell><cell>Ghấ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-jĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>November Ka-rúh-nụl-gụs Bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-zá-kĭ-a Nlhch-ĭ Ts'ấ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-sĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>December</cell><cell>Sŏs-nalh-tús</cell><cell>Bi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-nai-a-shé̆</cell><cell>Nlhch-ĭ Tsa</cell>
</row>
</table>

<pb n="142" /><anchor id="Pg142" />

<figure url="images/image78.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschĕbaád</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi>—Navaho</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschĕbaád</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi>—Navaho</figDesc>
</figure>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Natural Phenomena</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ashes</cell><cell>ĭlh-chí</cell><cell>kus-chí-ĭsh</cell><cell>hlesh-ch'ái</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>charcoal</cell><cell>tli-té̆sh</cell><cell>kus-chí</cell><cell>t'ĕsh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>cloud</cell><cell>ya-kó̆s</cell><cell>kos</cell><cell>kos</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>darkness</cell><cell>chalh-ké̆lh</cell><cell>kli<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>cha-halh-kélh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>day</cell><cell>dji</cell><cell>dji<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>jĭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>earth</cell><cell>ni-go-stú̆n</cell><cell>ní-to-gus-an</cell><cell>ní-ho-ĕs-tsan</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>fire</cell><cell>koh</cell><cell>ku</cell><cell>kŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ice</cell><cell>ti</cell><cell>i-lá</cell><cell>tqĭn</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>lake</cell><cell>tu-sĭ-kấ</cell><cell>ko-zĭlh-ká</cell><cell>to</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>light</cell><cell>go-tí</cell><cell>go-tíh</cell><cell>a-dí̆n-din</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>lightning</cell><cell>há-dĭlh-kĭh</cell><cell>í-dĭlh-chĭl</cell><cell>a-tsín-ĭl-klĭsh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>Milky-way</cell><cell>I-kú̆tl bâ-há</cell><cell>Tsós-pai</cell><cell>Klĕ-kái stá-ĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mist</cell><cell>ât</cell><cell>ku-bĕ-zhá-zi</cell><cell>i-dzí</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>moon</cell><cell>klĕ-ga-na-ái</cell><cell>klĕ-na-ái</cell><cell>klĕ-ho-na-ái</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mountain</cell><cell>tzĭlh</cell><cell>tzĭlh</cell><cell>tzĭlh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>night</cell><cell>klĕ</cell><cell>kli</cell><cell>klé-jĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>Pleiades</cell><cell>Nụs-ka-o-ŭ-hú</cell><cell>Sŏ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>s-chi-sté̆</cell><cell>Dí̆l-gĕ-het</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>rain</cell><cell>ná-ĭl-tĭ</cell><cell>na-golh-kí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>nĭt-sú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>rainbow</cell><cell>hi-tsâ-tlúl</cell><cell>ĭt-su<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-to-lé̆ nads-í-lĭd</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>river</cell><cell>tu-ndlí</cell><cell>ko-dlé̆</cell><cell>to</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>rock</cell><cell>tse</cell><cell>tsi</cell><cell>tsĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>shooting-star (meteor)</cell><cell>tĭtl-só<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-sé̆ nụl-tú̆</cell><cell>sush-na-tsé̆</cell><cell>sŏ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-á̆-dal-dsĭd</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>sky</cell><cell>yá-dĭlh-kĭh</cell><cell>ya</cell><cell>yá-dĭlh-kĭh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>smoke</cell><cell>tlĭk</cell><cell>kli</cell><cell>hlĭd</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>snow</cell><cell>sŏs</cell><cell>zŏs</cell><cell>yăs</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>star</cell><cell>tĭtl-só̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-sĕ</cell><cell>so<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>s</cell><cell>so<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>sun</cell><cell>chu-ga-na-ái</cell><cell>chun-na-ái</cell><cell>chĕ-ho-na-ái</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>thunder</cell><cell>i-dá-ndi</cell><cell>i-dĭlh-ní</cell><cell>í-nĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>water</cell><cell>tu</cell><cell>ko</cell><cell>to</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>wind</cell><cell>ní̆l-chi</cell><cell>nl-chi</cell><cell>ní̆l-chi</cell>
</row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Numerals</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>
one</cell><cell>hlá-ĭ</cell><cell>hlá-ĭ</cell><cell>hlá-ĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>two</cell><cell>ná-kĭ</cell><cell>ná-kĭ</cell><cell>ná-kĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>three</cell><cell>tá-gĭ</cell><cell>ká-i</cell><cell>ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>four</cell><cell>dí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ĭ</cell><cell>dí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ĭ</cell><cell>di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>five</cell><cell>ăsh-tlá-ĭ</cell><cell>á̆sh-tlĕ</cell><cell>á̆sh-dla</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>six</cell><cell>gus-tán</cell><cell>kus-kú̆n</cell><cell>has-tá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>seven</cell><cell>gus-tsí̆-gĭ</cell><cell>kus-tsí̆t-i</cell><cell>tsósts-ĕd</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>eight</cell><cell>tsá-bi</cell><cell>tsá-bi</cell><cell>tsé-bi</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>nine</cell><cell>ngus-tá-i</cell><cell>nkus-tá-i</cell><cell>nâas-dái</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>ten</cell><cell>gú-nĕz-na</cell><cell>kú-nĕz-ni</cell><cell>né̆z-na</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>eleven</cell><cell>hla-zá-ta</cell><cell>hla-ĭ-zá</cell><cell>hla-zá̆-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>twelve</cell><cell>na-kĭ-zá-ta</cell><cell>na-ki-zá</cell><cell>na-ki-zá-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>thirteen</cell><cell>ta-zá-ta</cell><cell>ka-zá</cell><cell>ta-zá-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>fourteen</cell><cell>di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-zá-ta</cell><cell>di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-zá</cell><cell>di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-zấ-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>fifteen</cell><cell>ăsh-tla-á-ta</cell><cell>ăsh-tlĕ-zá</cell><cell>ăsh-dla-ấ-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>sixteen</cell><cell>gus-ta-á-ta</cell><cell>kus-kŭn-zá</cell><cell>has-ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ấ-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>seventeen</cell><cell>gus-tsĭ-zá-ta</cell><cell>kus-tsĭt-zá</cell><cell>tsosts-ĕd-zấ-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>eighteen</cell><cell>tsa-bi-zá-ta</cell><cell>tsa-bi-zá</cell><cell>tse-bi-dzấ-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>nineteen</cell><cell>ngus-ta-dzá-ta</cell><cell>nkus-ta-zá</cell><cell>nâas-dai-dzấ-ta</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>twenty</cell><cell>na-dí̆n</cell><cell>na-tín</cell><cell>na-dí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>twenty-one</cell><cell>na-dí̆n-hla</cell><cell>na-tín-hla</cell><cell>na-dí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-hla</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>thirty</cell><cell>ta-dí̆n</cell><cell>ka-tín</cell><cell>tá-di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>forty</cell><cell>dĭs-dí̆n</cell><cell>dĭs-tín</cell><cell>dí̆s-di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>fifty</cell><cell>ăsh-tlá-dĭn</cell><cell>ăsh-tlé̆-tin</cell><cell>á̆sh-dla-di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>one hundred gú-nĕz-na-dĭn kú-nĕz-ni-tin</cell><cell>né̆z-na-di<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
</table>

<pb n="143" /><anchor id="Pg143" />

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Personal Terms</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>aunt</cell><cell>ko-bá̆-zhĕ</cell><cell>ku-bá-zhĕ</cell><cell>shi-bí̆-zhi</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>baby</cell><cell>mĕ</cell><cell>ô-ja-zí̆</cell><cell>a-wé̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>boy</cell><cell>skhĭn</cell><cell>ĭsh-ki-í<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>skhi</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>brother (younger) ko-kí̆zn ko-kă-gé̆ na-râ-hí̆</cell><cell>ku-ĭ-zhá</cell><cell>sí̆-tsĭ-lĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>brother (elder) ko-kí̆zn ụn na-râ-hí̆</cell><cell>ku-na-á</cell><cell>shí̆-nai</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>child</cell><cell>châ-rá-shĕ</cell><cell>ilh-chí̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>shĭ-yá̆zh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>clan</cell><cell>ndĕ-áz-dĭ-i</cell><cell>ĭ-chu-gĕ-dé̆ dĭ-né̆-ĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>enemy</cell><cell>ĕ-ná</cell><cell>ko-ndá</cell><cell>a-ná</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>father</cell><cell>ko-tá̆</cell><cell>ku-kấ-ĭ</cell><cell>shi-zhé̆-ĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>girl</cell><cell>na-lí̆n</cell><cell>ish-té̆tn</cell><cell>at-é̆d</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>man</cell><cell>ndĕ</cell><cell>tĭn-dé̆</cell><cell>dĭ-né̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>medicine-man</cell><cell>dĭ-gí̆n</cell><cell>tin-dá-ko-ka-tlé̆</cell><cell>ha-tá-lĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>mother</cell><cell>ko-mấ</cell><cell>ku-sí</cell><cell>sha-mú̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>people (tribesmen)</cell><cell>ko-kí</cell><cell>shĕ-tĭn-dé̆</cell><cell>dĭ-né̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>people (strangers)</cell><cell>tlúh-go ndé̆-hi</cell><cell>ta-á-tso</cell><cell>a-ná</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>person</cell><cell>tsĭlh-kí̆dn</cell><cell>ti-ní</cell><cell>dĭ-né̆</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>sister (younger)</cell><cell>ko-dĭ-zhé̆</cell><cell>shĕ-lá</cell><cell>shi-dé-zhĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>sister (elder)</cell><cell>ko-lú</cell><cell>shĕ-nda-té̆</cell><cell>shú̆d-dĭ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>uncle</cell><cell>ko-dâ-ú̆</cell><cell>shĕ-ka-na-tlé̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell><cell>shi-bí̆-zhi</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>woman</cell><cell>ĭst-só̆n</cell><cell>ĕs-tsán</cell><cell>ĕs-tsán</cell>
</row>
</table>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Trees</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>cedar</cell><cell>gá-ĭl-lĭ</cell><cell>kálh-tĕ</cell><cell>gad</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>cottonwood</cell><cell>t'is</cell><cell>tu-ás</cell><cell>t'is</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>juniper</cell><cell>dĭl-tút-hlĕ-chi</cell><cell></cell><cell>gad náz-si</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>oak</cell><cell>chi-chí̆l</cell><cell>shun-chi-lé̆</cell><cell>ché̆-chĭl</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>pine</cell><cell>ndĭl-chí</cell><cell>nus-chí</cell><cell>ndish-chí</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>piñon</cell><cell>o-bĕ-tsí̆n</cell><cell>ĭ-zĕn-chí</cell><cell>chá̆-olh</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>spruce</cell><cell>djụ-útlh</cell><cell>kŏn-skĕ-lé̆</cell><cell>dishl-bái</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>willow</cell><cell>gai</cell><cell>kí̆-ĭ</cell><cell>k'á-i</cell>
</row>
</table>

<pb n="144" /><anchor id="Pg144" />

<figure url="images/image79.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Navaho Women</head>
<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">From Copyright Photograph 1906 by E.S. Curtis</hi></p>
<figDesc>Illustration: Navaho Women</figDesc>
</figure>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm} p{1.75cm}'">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Miscellaneous</hi></head>
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">English</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarilla</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>
arm</cell><cell>ko-gún</cell><cell>gŏn</cell><cell>a-gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>food</cell><cell>chi-zú̆n</cell><cell>ai-tá-i</cell><cell>chi-án</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>forest</cell><cell>gụd-nlh-chíl</cell><cell>ku-dŏn-chíl</cell><cell>tsĭn</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>god</cell><cell>ya-á-diz-tan</cell><cell>bi-tsa-shĕ-ndá-ĭ ye</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>jewels</cell><cell>tsĕ-rụ-dé̆n-lĭg-gĕ</cell><cell>n'klĭz</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>large</cell><cell>n'chai</cell><cell>n'tsai</cell><cell>n'tsa</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>pollen</cell><cell>há-dĭn-tĭn tlâsh</cell><cell>tá-dĭ-tĭn</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>small</cell><cell>ăl-chí̆-se</cell><cell>ŭns-tsé̆s-tĕ</cell><cell>yá-zhĕ</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>spirits</cell><cell>chĭdn</cell><cell>kuts-áin</cell><cell>tsĭ*n-di</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>spirit-land chĭdn-túh-yo bits-áin bĕ-kĕ-yá</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>tobacco</cell><cell>tzĭlh-ná-to</cell><cell>ná-to-tĕ</cell><cell>n'át'o</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>turquoise</cell><cell>du-tlí̆sh-ĭ</cell><cell>da-tlí̆sh-ĕ</cell><cell>dó-tlĭsh</cell>
</row>
</table>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<pb n="147" /><anchor id="Pg147" />
<head>INDEX</head>


<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Abalone</hi>, cross of, on medicine cap, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Acoma</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Acorns</hi> eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Acosta</hi>, an Apache, conference with, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ádĭlhkĭh</hi> (Black Fog) of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">After-world</hi> in Apache belief, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla belief, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  in Navaho belief, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Agave.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mescal</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ágocho.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pigeon</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Agriculture</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ahánĭ clan</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Aiahá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> clan</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Aklólh.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rainbow</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Alabama</hi>, Apache sent to, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">All-color Corn Girl</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Alphabet</hi> used for Indian terms, vi</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Anatomical terms</hi>, Athapascan, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Animal chiefs</hi> in Navaho under-world, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Animals</hi>, Athapascan terms for, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref><lb />
  deified by Apache, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref><lb />
  in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  represented in Jicarilla dry-painting, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  spirits of, prayers to, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ánltsĭstn</hi>, a Jicarilla god, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Whirlwind</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Antelope monster</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Antelope skin</hi> used in maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache</hi>, account of the, <ref target="Pg003">1</ref>-49<lb />
  and Navaho compared, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref><lb />
  application of term, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref><lb />
  character of the, xix<lb />
  Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  people among Navaho, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref><lb />
  tribal summary of, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>-134<lb />
  vocabulary of, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>-144</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apache-Mohave</hi> assigned to reservation, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref><lb />
  character of, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>-6<lb />
  subdued by Crook, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mohave</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches del Perrillo</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches de Nabajú</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches Faraones</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches Gileños</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches Lipanes</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches Llaneros</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches Tejua</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apaches Vaqueros</hi> mentioned, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Apátĭĕh</hi>, application of term, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Arapaho</hi>, Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Arivaipa</hi>, Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  clans of the, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Armor</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Arrow-point</hi> as knife in ceremony, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Arrows</hi> in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref>, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>-108, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Art</hi>, graphic, of the Apache, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Painting</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Arts</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Basketry</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Handicrafts</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Industries</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pottery</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Silver-work</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ástsĕ Ĕstsán</hi>, First Woman of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>-95</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ástsĕ Hástĭn</hi>, First Man of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>-96</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Atsósĭ Hatál.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Feather Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Áya Kĭnné̆</hi>, a traditional people, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>-107</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Badger</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Badger People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bahózhonchi</hi>, a Navaho priesthood, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref><lb />
  songs of the, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref></p>

<pb n="148" /><anchor id="Pg148" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Balíl</hi>, sacred wand of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Basket</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref><lb />
  medicine, in Navaho Night Chant, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  wedding, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Basket drum</hi> of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  in Navaho Night Chant, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Basketry</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>-21, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  sacred symbol prescribed for, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Water Bottle</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Baskets</hi>, burden, used by Apache, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla, traded for corn, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bat</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>-68</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bathing</hi> by the Apache, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref><lb />
  following puberty rite, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hair-washing</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Washing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bead Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Beads</hi>, cross and crescent worked in, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref><lb />
  of precious stones in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref><lb />
  shell, in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>-107<lb />
  shell, mixed with pollen, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref><lb />
  silver, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref><lb />
  symbolic of prayer, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  used in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  white, on medicine caps, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Beans</hi> depicted in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bear People</hi> of Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bears</hi> in Apache mythology, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref><lb />
  in Navaho dry-painting, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref><lb />
  tabooed as food by Apache, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  tabooed as food by Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bear Springs</hi> valley, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bear, Tracking</hi>, a Navaho monster, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Beasts of burden</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Beaver</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Beds</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Begging ceremony</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Belts</hi>, maternity, used by Apache, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>-39<lb />
  silver, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Big Dipper</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Big God</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ</hi>, a Navaho mythic character, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>-116</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bĭnáyeaganĭ</hi>, a Navaho monster, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bird People</hi> of Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Birds</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Birth.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Childbirth</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Black Cloud</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clouds</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Black Fog.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ádĭlhkĭh</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Black God</hi>, the Navaho Fire God, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>-104</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Black Man.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Haschí̆n Dí̆lhĭli</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Black river</hi>, Arizona, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Blankets</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref><lb />
  medicine-men compensated with, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>-75, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  used in marriage settlement, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Blindness</hi>, fear of, by initiates, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  from looking upon mother-in-law, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Blowing</hi> to expel spirits, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bluebird song</hi> of Yébĭchai ceremony, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Blue Corn Boy</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bosque Redondo</hi>, Navaho removed to, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref><lb />
  plan to remove Apache to, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mescalero Reservation</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bounty</hi> offered for scalps, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bourke</hi>, John G., cited, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bowl</hi> of pearl in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref><lb />
  of shell used for medicine, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  of turquoise in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bows.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Arrows</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bracelets</hi>, silver, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Breech-cloth.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Loin-cloth</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Buckskin.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Deerskin</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Buffalo</hi> hunted by Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla after-world, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  horns, myth concerning, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Buffalo skin</hi>, tipis of, of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  used in Jicarilla ceremony, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bumping Rocks</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rolling Stone</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Burial.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> Mortuary Customs</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Butterfly</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Buttons</hi>, silver, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Buzzard People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cabezon mountain</hi>, mythic creation of, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cactus</hi>, fastened to Apache clothing, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Food</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cairns</hi>, Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Camp life</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cañon de Chelly</hi>, Navaho defeated in, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref><lb />
  Navaho farms in, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tsé̆gyiĭ</hi></p>

<pb n="149" /><anchor id="Pg149" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Caps</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  sacred, prescribed in Messiah religion, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Headdress</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Medicine Cap</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cardinal points</hi> and Apache prayer, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  color symbolism of, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref>, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>-92, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  considered in dance circle, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  in Apache ceremony, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref><lb />
  in wedding ceremony, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb />
  prescribed order of, in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  represented by gods, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  terms for, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Orientation</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Carleton</hi>, Gen. J. H., in Apache campaign, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  Navaho subdued by, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Carrizo</hi>, stream in Apache-land, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Carson</hi>, Col. Kit, Navaho defeated by, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cassari</hi>, conference with, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Catamenia</hi>, mythic significance of, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cedar</hi>, use of, in dance, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref>, <ref target="Pg049">49</ref><lb />
  used in effacing footprints, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>-81</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ceremonies</hi>, Apache, summary of, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>-79, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>-127, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  puberty, of Apache, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dance</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marriage</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Puberty Ceremony</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chalhké̆lh Nalí̆n.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Night Girl</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zhní̆</hi>, Jicarilla clowns, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chato</hi>, raids by Apache under, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chĕhonaái</hi>, the Sun of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chuganaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chunnaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sun</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chiefs</hi> among the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref><lb />
  among the Navaho, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chihuahua</hi>, Apache raids into, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref><lb />
  scalp bounty offered by, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Childbirth</hi>, gods invoked at, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  medicine-men participate at, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Children</hi>, Apache affection toward, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref><lb />
  Apache, disposal of bodies of, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Apache, early training of, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref><lb />
  participate in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>-47, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>-125</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chiricahua Apache</hi> at Fort Sill, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  clans of the, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  descent among the, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  flee to New Mexico in 1876, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  raids by, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  tribal name of, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chóĭli</hi>, sacred mountain of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chuganaái</hi>, Apache Sun God, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>-27, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>-31, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chĕhonaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chunnaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sun</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Chunnaái</hi>, Jicarilla Sun God, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>-68, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cibicu fight</hi> in 1882, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>-12</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Civilization</hi>, effect of, on Indians, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Clan system</hi> of Indians, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Clans</hi> absent among Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>-23, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>-98, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>-137</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cliff-dwellers</hi> in Navaho clans, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>-107, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref><lb />
  mummies of, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>-75</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Clothing</hi> decorated with cross and crescent, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref><lb />
  deposited with the dead, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  of flint in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref><lb />
  of godly personators, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  of turquoise in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Caps</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Costume</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hair-dressing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Clouds</hi>, Apache god of, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  in Apache mythology, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>-30, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref><lb />
  symbolized on maternity belt, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref><lb />
  symbolized on medicine cap, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Black Cloud</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Clown</hi>, Gaŭnĕskí̆dĕ functions as, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref><lb />
  in Navaho ceremony, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>-121<lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cochiti</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Colorado river</hi>, mythic creation of, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Colors</hi>, Athapascan terms for, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref><lb />
  directional, of the Apache, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>-27, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref><lb />
  directional, of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref>, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref><lb />
  directional, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>-92, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref></p>

<pb n="150" /><anchor id="Pg150" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Comanche</hi>, Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Contests</hi> of skill in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>-108</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cooking</hi> of mescal by Apache, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>-18<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Food</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Copper Mines</hi>, conference with Apache at, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Copper-working</hi> by the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Corn</hi> deities of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref><lb />
  depicted in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref><lb />
  man born of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref><lb />
  prayers for, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref><lb />
  túlapai made from, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref><lb />
  used in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>-47, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Seed</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Corn-meal</hi>, mush of, in Navaho marriage ceremony, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref><lb />
  sacred use of, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref><lb />
  used in drying hair, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See also</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Meal</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cosmology.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Genesis</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Costume</hi> of girls during puberty rite, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  of Yébĭchai dancers, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cotton</hi>, blankets of, in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Coyote</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Coyote Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Coyoteros</hi>, Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  assigned to reservation, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref><lb />
  clans of the, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  organization of the, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref><lb />
  population of the, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  subdued by Crook, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cradle-board</hi> deposited with infant's remains, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Creation.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Genesis</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Crescent.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> Cross and Crescent</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cricket Girl</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Crook</hi>, Gen. George, Apache campaign by, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>-10</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Crops</hi>, fructification of, by Yólkai Ĕstsán, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref><lb />
  Goddess of, of Apache, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Harvests</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cross</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  made by Apache, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  on Apache medicine cap, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cross and crescent</hi> in Apache religion, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref><lb />
  on Apache basketry, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref><lb />
  origin of, among Apache, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Crow</hi> in Apache mythology, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Crow People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Crystal.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Quartz crystal</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Cuticle</hi>, people created from, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dance</hi> by Apache to revive dead, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>-11<lb />
  during puberty rites, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref><lb />
  for rain among Apache, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  Harvest, of the Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ceremonies</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yébĭchai</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dance of the Gods</hi> of Apache, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>-49</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Das Lan</hi>, Apache medicine-man, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>-46</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dátĭlyĕ.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Humming-bird</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Davis</hi>, Inspector-General, confers with Apache, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dawn</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dead</hi>, Apache attempt to revive, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  how regarded by Navaho, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Burial</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mortuary customs</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Death</hi>, Apache conception of, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  controlled by Yólkai Nalí̆n, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  origin of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Death Goddess</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Deer</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Deerskin</hi>, Apache paintings on, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref><lb />
  masks of god personators, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  used in maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Déĭlgĕt</hi>, an Antelope monster, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dĕpé̆nsa</hi>, a Navaho sacred mountain, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Descent</hi> among the Apache, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  among the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Inheritance</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Designs</hi>, pottery, of Navaho gods, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ornament</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dĭgí̆n.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Holy People</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dĭné̆</hi>, Navaho tribal name, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Directions.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Cardinal points</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Disease</hi>, how expelled by Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref><lb />
  how regarded by Apache, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  origin of, in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref><lb />
  God of, of Apache, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> Medicine; Medicine-men; Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Divorce</hi> among the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marriage</hi></p>

<pb n="151" /><anchor id="Pg151" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Doh.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fly</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Doklí̆nĭ.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Nabakéltĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dokóŏslit</hi>, a Navaho sacred mountain, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dó<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ĭ Tlí̆shĭ Nôĭltá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sh.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Das Lan</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dreamer.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bĭlh Ahatí̆nĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dreams</hi>, ceremonies affected by, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  God of, in Apache cosmology, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Visions</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dress.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Drowning</hi>, rescue from, attributed to gods, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Drum</hi>, basket, of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  basket, used in Navaho Night Chant, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  medicine, of Apache, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref><lb />
  used in Apache dance, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dry-paintings</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref>, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>-123, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dutlí̆shĭ Nalí̆n</hi>, Turquoise Girl, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See also</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Turquoise Woman</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dutlí̆shĭ Skhĭn</hi>, Turquoise Boy, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dwellings</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>-76, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>-81, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hogán</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Houses</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tipis</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Eagle</hi>, feathers of, in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref>-64, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref><lb />
  feathers of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref><lb />
  feathers of, in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref><lb />
  giant, in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>-68<lb />
  giant, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Eagle People</hi>, how supplicated, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Earth</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Earth Daughter</hi> of Apache mythology, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Earth God</hi> of Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Earth Messengers</hi> of Apache mythology, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Elk</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ĕnásho Dĭlhklí̆shĕn</hi>, an Apache deity, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ĕstsán Nátlĕshĭn</hi>, a Jicarilla deity, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Evil-spirit Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Evil spirits</hi> banished in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>-120</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Face-painting</hi> of Jicarilla dancers, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fasting</hi> by Apache medicine-men, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fear</hi> of Apache by other tribes, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref><lb />
  unknown to Apache, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Feather Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Feathers</hi>, eagle, in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref>-64, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref><lb />
  eagle, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref><lb />
  eagle, in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref><lb />
  employed in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla headdress of, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref><lb />
  turkey, prayer-sticks of, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Feather wands</hi> in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fermentation</hi> by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>-20</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fire</hi>, how made by Apache, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref><lb />
  mythic origin of, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref><lb />
  used in God Dance, <ref target="Pg049">49</ref><lb />
  used in Jicarilla ceremony, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref><lb />
  used in Night-Chant ceremony, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb />
  used at Yébĭchai Dance, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fireflies</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fire God</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>-104</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fire-sticks</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref>, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">First Man.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ástsĕ Hástĭn</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">First Woman.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ástsĕ Ĕstsán</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fish</hi> tabooed by Apache, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  tabooed by Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Flint</hi> clothing in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Flood</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>-28<lb />
  in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Florida</hi>, Apache prisoners sent to, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Flutes</hi> mentioned in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fly</hi> (Doh) in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fog.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clouds</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rain</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Food</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>-16, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref><lb />
  terms for, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>-140<lb />
  used during maturity rite, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Taboo</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Foot-racing</hi> at time of Night Chant, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fort Apache</hi>, Apache scouts at, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  Coyoteros placed near, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fort Apache agency</hi>, number of Apache at, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fort Sill</hi>, Apache sent to, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  Chiricahua at, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fort Sumner</hi>, New Mexico, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bosque Redondo</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fort Wingate</hi>, Apache surrender at, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  Navaho arrive at, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref></p>

<pb n="152" /><anchor id="Pg152" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Four</hi>, an Apache sacred number, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref>-43</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fox People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Frightening</hi> the patient in Night Chant ceremony, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fringe Mouths</hi>, Navaho deities, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Frogs</hi>, creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fungi</hi> eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Fun-maker.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clown</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Furniture</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gấgé̆.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Crow</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gambler</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gamblers</hi> present at Night Chant, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭáĭ</hi>, a Navaho god, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref><lb />
  represented in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Garcés</hi>, Francisco, on the Apache, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gáŭn</hi>, Apache gods, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Genesis</hi> of Navaho clans, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>-35, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>-62, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>-98, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Geronimo</hi>, capture of, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  raids by Apache under, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ghost Dance</hi> identified with Dance of Gods, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Giants</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>-106<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Monsters</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Girl Dance</hi> among Apache, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Goddesses</hi>, how personated in Navaho ceremony, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gods</hi>, Indian belief in power of, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  personated in Apache ceremony, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dance</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Holy People</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mythology</hi>;  <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Religion</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gopher</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Goshonné</hi>, Apache medicine-man, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gourd</hi> drinking cups of Apache, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Government</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chiefs</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Political organization</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Grasshopper People</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Graves</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mortuary customs</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gray God.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hasché̆lapai</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Great Dipper.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Big Dipper</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Green things</hi> created by Turquoise Girl, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Guadalupe Hidalgo</hi>, treaty of, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Habitat</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Habitations.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dwellings</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hogán</hi>;  <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Houses</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tipis</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hádĭlhkĭh.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lightning</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hádĭntĭn Nalí̆n</hi>, Pollen Girl, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>-29, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref><lb />
  functions of, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>-35<lb />
  invoked by Apache, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hádĭntin Skhĭn</hi>, Pollen Boy, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>-31, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  function of, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  invoked by Apache, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See also</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pollen</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tádĭtĭn</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hair-cutting</hi> as a sign of mourning, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hair-dressing</hi> of girls during maturity rite, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hair-washing</hi> ceremony of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Haísndayĭn</hi>, Jicarilla tribal name, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Handicrafts</hi>, terms for, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Arts</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Basketry</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Industries</hi>;  <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pottery</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Silver-work</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Happiness Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>-111</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Harvest Dance</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Harvest God</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭdĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Harvests</hi> prayed for by Apache, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Crops</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschĕbaád</hi>, a Navaho goddess, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref><lb />
  personated in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>-120<lb />
  represented in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref><lb />
  significance of, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschĕbakú̆<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi> personated in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  represented in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆lapai</hi> personated in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆ltĭ</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>-94, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  personated in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>-120<lb />
  represented in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hasché̆zhĭnĭ</hi>, Navaho Fire God, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>-104</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschí̆n Dí̆lhĭli</hi>, a god of creation, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Haschógan</hi>, Navaho House Gods, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>-93, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>-97, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>-104, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Háshkĕ Ní̆lntĕ</hi>, Apache medicine-man, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hashklí̆shnĭ</hi> clan, origin of, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Havasupai</hi>, Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  baskets of, among Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<pb n="153" /><anchor id="Pg153" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hawk People of the Navaho</hi>, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Head-dress</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Caps</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hair-dressing</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Medicine cap</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Healing rites.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Medicine</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Health</hi>, God and Goddess of, of Apache, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hermaphrodites</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg085">85</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hills</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mountains</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">History</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>-23<lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>-83</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hochónchĭ Hatal.</hi> See Evil-spirit Chant</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hogán</hi>, the Navaho house, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dwellings</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Houses</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tsí̆ndi hogán</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Holy People</hi> of Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>-84, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>-96, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>-113, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Home life</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Honesty</hi>, how regarded by the Navaho, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hopi</hi>, Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Apache raids in country of, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  visited by Garcés, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Horse-racing</hi> at time of Night Chant, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Horses</hi>, accoutrement of, ornamented by Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref><lb />
  branded with sacred symbol, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref><lb />
  sacrificed at graves, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  used as doctors' fees, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref><lb />
  used in marriage settlement, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>-138</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Horse-thieving</hi> by the Navaho, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hostilities</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>-23<lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>-83</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">House Gods.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Haschógan</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Houses</hi>, medicine, of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>-14, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref><lb />
  of the dead burned by Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref><lb />
  owned by Navaho women, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> Dwellings; Hogán; Tipis</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hozhónĭ Hatál.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Happiness Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Humming-bird</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hunchback gods</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hunting</hi> by the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>-135</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Images</hi> used by Apache, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>-41, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Implements</hi>, Jicarilla, origin of, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Incantation</hi> used in treating disease, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Indian Office</hi>, policy of, regarding Apache, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Industries</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Arts</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Handicrafts</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Inheritance</hi> among Apache, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref><lb />
  among Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Descent</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Initiation</hi> into Yébĭchai order, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Intellect</hi>, Goddess of, of Apache, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Intoxicants</hi> used by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Iron-working</hi> by the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Irrigation</hi> practised by Navaho, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Isleta</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Itsá.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Eagle</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Itsád Ndé̆yu.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Eagle People</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jemez</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  people among Navaho, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jet</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lignite</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jewelry</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>-77</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jewels</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Abalone</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Jet</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Moss agate</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pearl</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Quartz crystal</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Shell</hi>;  <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Turquoise</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Jicarillas</hi>, account of the, <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>-69<lb />
  population of the, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  tribal summary of the, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  vocabulary of the, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>-144</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Juan José</hi>, an Apache chief, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Juh</hi>, raids by Apache under, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Juniper berries</hi> used by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kâgĕ.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Crow</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kearny</hi>, Col. S. W., cited, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kĕdán</hi>, Navaho ceremonial paraphernalia, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>-118</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kĕldi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>shé̆n.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Skunk</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kĭnní̆nĭkai</hi>, a Navaho locality, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kí̆nya Ánĭ</hi> clan, origin of, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kiowa</hi>, Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kiowa Apache</hi>, population of, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Klĕganaái</hi>, the Moon, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Klĕhonaái</hi>, the Moon, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Klĕnaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Moon</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kléjĕ Hatál.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Night Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Klĕnaái</hi>, the Moon, in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Klĕganaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Klĕhonaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Moon</hi></p>

<pb n="154" /><anchor id="Pg154" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Klí̆shcho Nalí̆n</hi>, Snake Girl, symbolized on maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Knives</hi> in Navaho ceremony, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kobadjischínĭ</hi>, a Jicarilla god, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>-68, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kolhkahí<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi>, a Jicarilla division, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kósdĭlhkĭh.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Black Cloud</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kówa</hi>, the Apache house, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>-14, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>-45<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dwellings</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Kútĕrastan</hi>, Apache creator, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>-30, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Laguna</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Language.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Vocabulary</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">La Plata mountain</hi>, mythic creation of, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Leggings</hi>, deerskin, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Lightning</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref>-33<lb />
  in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  represented in dry-paintings, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  symbolized on maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Lightning arrows</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Lightning-stroke</hi>, how treated by Apache, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Lignite</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Jet</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Little Colorado river</hi>, creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Lizards</hi>, creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Llaneros</hi>, a band of Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Locust</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Locust People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Loin-cloth</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Magpie</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Maguey.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mescal</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mai Hatál.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Coyote Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Maínĕli<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Gopher</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Man-eating Bird</hi>, a Navaho monster, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mangas Coloradas</hi>, an Apache warrior, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sché̆.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Spider</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Manuelito</hi>, chief of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Manzanita</hi> used by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Maricopa</hi> in Apache war, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Marriage</hi> among the Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  among the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  among the Navaho, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref>-127, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>-137<lb />
  and property among Apache, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>-23<lb />
  restrictions among Apache, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Women</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Masks</hi> of Apache dancers, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  of Navaho gods, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  used in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>-123</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Maternity belt</hi> of Apache, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>-39</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Maturity.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Puberty</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Meal, sacred</hi>, carried by Hasché̆ltĭ, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  used in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  used in Jicarilla ceremony, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref><lb />
  used in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See also</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Corn-meal</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine</hi>, dry-paintings used in, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine cap</hi> used by Apache, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine ceremonies</hi>, God Dance a part of, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>-79<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Night Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine craze.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messiah craze</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine Dance</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine hogán</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine-making</hi> in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine-men</hi> and ceremonies, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  communicate with gods, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  employment of, in puberty rites, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  marriage ceremony conducted by, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  Navaho, functions of, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>-80<lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>-42, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  participate in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>-124</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine performance</hi> of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine plants</hi>, how gathered, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine practices</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>-42</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Medicine skin</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>-36</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Meriwether</hi>, Gov. David, treats with Navaho, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mescal</hi> harvest of the Apache, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>-19<lb />
  intoxicant made from, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mescalero reservation</hi>, Chiricahua sent to, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bosque Redondo</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mescaleros</hi> confined at Bosque Redondo, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref><lb />
  depredations by, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref><lb />
  flee from reservation, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  plan to place Arizona Apache with, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  population of the, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mesquite pods</hi> eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Messiah craze</hi> among Apache, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>-46<lb />
  Apache houses affected by, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  basketry designs affected by, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>-21</p>

<pb n="155" /><anchor id="Pg155" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Metal-work</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>-77</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mexican</hi> captives enslaved by Navaho, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref><lb />
  coins used in Navaho silver-work, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Migration</hi>, traditional, of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Miles</hi>, Gen. N. A., subdues Apache, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Milky Way</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Miracle performers</hi> of Apache myth, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  of Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>-68<lb />
  of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Miraculous personages</hi> of Apache myth, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  of Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Gods</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Moccasins</hi>, cross and crescent on, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Modesty</hi> of Apache women, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mohave</hi>, Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Apache-Mohave</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Monsters</hi> in Apache mythology, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref>-68, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Giants</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Water Monsters</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Months</hi>, names of, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Moon</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref><lb />
  creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Moon God.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Klĕganaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Klĕhonaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Klĕnaái</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Moons</hi>, names of, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mortars</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mortuary customs</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Moss agate</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mother-in-law</hi>, taboo of, among Navaho, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mountain Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mountain lion</hi>, in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref><lb />
  skin of, used in maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mountain Lion People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mountain sheep</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>-114</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mountains</hi>, mythic creation of, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>-91<lb />
  sacred, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>-91, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mourning</hi> by the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>-56, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mortuary customs</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Muhr</hi>, A. F., acknowledgments to, xx</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mummies</hi> in cliff-ruins, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>-75</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Murder</hi> among the Apache, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Musical instruments</hi> of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>-57<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Drums</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Flutes</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rattles</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Myers</hi>, W. E., acknowledgments to, xx</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mythology</hi>, Apache, basket designs and, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>-35<lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>-57, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>-69<lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>-106<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ceremonies</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Genesis</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Religion</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nabakéltĭ</hi>, Apache medicine-man, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>-12</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nacholécho.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tarantula</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Names</hi> adopted by Apache, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref><lb />
  native, of Indian tribes, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  of dead tabooed, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  of the moons or months, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nané</hi>, conference with, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  raids by Apache under, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nasté̆lh</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Natói Hatál.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Shooting Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Natural phenomena</hi>, terms for, <ref target="Pg142">142</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Navaho</hi>, account of the, <ref target="Pg071">71</ref>-127<lb />
  and Apache paintings compared, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref><lb />
  and Apache relationship, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref><lb />
  and Jicarilla ceremony compared, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref><lb />
  Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  character of ceremonies of, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref><lb />
  character of the, xx<lb />
  hair-dress of the, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  origin of the, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref><lb />
  trade of Jicarillas with, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  tribal summary of the, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  vocabulary of the, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>-144</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nayé̆nayĕzganĭ</hi>, a Jicarilla god, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>-57, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>-68, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nayé̆nĕzganĭ</hi>, Apache and Navaho deity, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  birth and adventures of, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>-106<lb />
  personated in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  represented in Apache painting, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  symbolized on maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ndĕ</hi>, Apache tribal name, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ndídĭlhkĭzn</hi>, Lightning Maker, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref><lb />
  symbolized on medicine cap, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ndísâgocha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi>, Lightning Rumbler, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nervousness</hi> treated by Apache, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">New Mexico</hi>, Chiricahua flee to, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  plan to remove Apache to, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<pb n="156" /><anchor id="Pg156" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">New Mexico</hi>, raids by Victorio in, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Night Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>-124</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Night Girl</hi> of Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nigostú̆n</hi>, the Earth, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nigostú̆n Bĭká Bĭnálzĕ.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Earth Messengers</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nigostú̆n Nalí̆n.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Earth Daughter</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ní̆lchi.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Winds</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nĭlchídĭlhkĭzn</hi>, the Apache Wind God, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Níchitso</hi>, a Jicarilla Whirlwind god, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nôkusé.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Big Dipper</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Number</hi>, sacred, of Apache, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref>-43</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Numerals</hi>, Southern Athapascan, <ref target="Pg142">142</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Obscenity</hi> of Jicarilla clowns, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ocean</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ojo Caliente</hi>, Apache of, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  Victorio surrenders at, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Oklahoma</hi>, Apache sent to, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  population of Apache in, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Olleros</hi> band of Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Onions</hi>, wild, eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Opuntia.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Prickly Pear</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Orientation</hi> in sweating ceremony, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  of baskets in ceremony, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref><lb />
  of buffalo skin in ceremony, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  of Jicarilla ceremonial enclosure, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  of Navaho hogáns, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  of sacred skins in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref><lb />
  of wedding basket, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Origin.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Genesis</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ornamentation</hi> of Apache caps, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ornaments</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ovens</hi>, mescal, used by Apache, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Owl</hi> in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Owl People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Painting</hi>, Apache, on deerskin, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  of bodies by Yébĭchai dancers, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref><lb />
  of skins in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dry-paintings</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Face-painting</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Paiute</hi>, baskets of, among Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Papago</hi>, Garcés among the, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref><lb />
  in Apache war, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Paralysis</hi> treated by Apache, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pasquin</hi>, conference with, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Peaches</hi>, an Apache man, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pearl</hi> in Navaho creation myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Personal terms</hi>, Southern Athapascan, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pesqueira</hi>, Don Ignacio, coöperates against Apache, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pestles</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Phillips</hi>, W. W., acknowledgments to, xx</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Phratries</hi> among the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Picuris</hi> mentioned in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pigeon</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pima</hi>, Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Garcés among the, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref><lb />
  in Apache war, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pinaleños</hi> established at San Carlos, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pine Squirrel People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pine-squirrel</hi> pouch of Hasché̆ltĭ, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Piñon</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref><lb />
  nuts of, eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref><lb />
  pollen of, used by Apache, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref><lb />
  tea made from bark of, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref><lb />
  used in ceremonial enclosure, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  used for mythic water bottle, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref><lb />
  water bottles coated with gum of, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pipes</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>-110, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Plains Indians</hi>, Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Plains People</hi>, a Jicarilla band, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Plants</hi> used in medicine, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Poisoned tobacco</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Political organization</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chiefs</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Government</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pollen</hi>, deification of, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref><lb />
  gathering of, by Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  god personators sprinkled with, <ref target="Pg049">49</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref><lb />
  use of, by Apache, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>-41, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  used in childbirth, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref><lb />
  used in marriage ceremony, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref><lb />
  used in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref><lb />
  used in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hádĭntĭn Nalí̆n</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hádĭntĭn Skhĭn</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps"> Tádĭtĭn</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Polygamy</hi> among the Apache, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>-14<lb />
  among the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref><lb />
  among the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref></p>

<pb n="157" /><anchor id="Pg157" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Population</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Porcupine</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Potatoes</hi>, wild, eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pottery</hi> made by Navaho gods, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pouch</hi> for image used by Apache, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref><lb />
  for meal used by Hasché̆ltĭ, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  for medicine used by Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  for pollen among Apache, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Prayers</hi>, how symbolized by Apache, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref><lb />
  in Navaho ceremonies, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  Navaho, character of, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>-78<lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>-37, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  on erection of hogán, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  to animal spirits, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Prayer-sticks</hi> of turkey feathers, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Kĕdán</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Precious Stone deities</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Jewels</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Presidios</hi> established to check Apache, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Prickly pears</hi> eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Property</hi> of women among Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Property marks</hi> of Apache, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Property right</hi> among Apache, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref><lb />
  among Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Prophecies</hi> of Apache medicine-man, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref><lb />
  of death among Apache, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Puberty ceremony</hi>, God Dance a part of, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>-95<lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>-125</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Pueblos</hi>, Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Apache raids against, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref><lb />
  baskets exchanged with, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref><lb />
  ceremonies of the, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref><lb />
  hair-dress of, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  incorporated by Navaho, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla ceremony borrowed from, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  Jicarillas trade with, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Purity</hi> symbolized by Apache, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Quartz crystal</hi> in Navaho creation myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Races.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Foot-racing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Racing songs</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rafts</hi> mentioned in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg085">85</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rain</hi> furnished by Yólkai Ĕstsán, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref><lb />
  man born of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rainbow</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref><lb />
  represented in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rain Boy</hi> and Girl of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rain Dance</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rain God</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tónenĭlĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rattles</hi> mentioned in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Red river</hi> of Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Reeds</hi>, use of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Religion</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">After-world</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ceremonies</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Messiah craze</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mythology</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Religious character</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Reptiles</hi>, creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rio Grande</hi>, creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ritual.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ceremonies</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mythology</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Religion</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rivers</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref><lb />
  creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Rolling Stone</hi>, a mythical monster, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bumping Rocks</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ruins</hi>, pueblo, in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Running</hi>, symbolic in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sacrifice</hi> of property at death, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Saddle bags</hi>, sacred symbol prescribed for, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sait Ndĕ</hi>, a Jicarilla division, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Salt</hi> tabooed during puberty rite, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Salvador</hi>, an Apache, conference with, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Carlos</hi>, Apache established at, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  Apache flee from, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Carlos agency</hi>, number of Apache under,  <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Carlos Apache</hi>, native name of, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Carlos reservation</hi>, property disputes on,  <ref target="Pg023">23</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sand altars.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dry-paintings</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sandia</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sand People</hi>, a Jicarilla band, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Felipe</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<pb n="158" /><anchor id="Pg158" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Ildefonso</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Juan</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Juan river</hi>, creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">San Xavier del Bac</hi>, mission of, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Santa Clara</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Santo Domingo</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Scalp bounty</hi> offered, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Scalping</hi> mentioned in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Scouts</hi>, Apache, at Fort Apache, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Scratching</hi> prohibited during maturity rite, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Seed planting</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg085">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg086">86</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Seeds</hi> borne by Gá<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>askĭdĭ, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  how prepared by Apache, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Corn</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sheep</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref><lb />
  purchased for Navaho, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref><lb />
  used in marriage settlement, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Shell</hi> beads mixed with pollen, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref><lb />
  beads of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref><lb />
  ornaments of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  symbolic of prayer, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  used as medicine bowl, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref><lb />
  used in puberty rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  white, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>,  <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yólkai Ĕstsán</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yólkai Nalí̆n</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Shield</hi> of Navaho Sun God, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Shirts.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Shooting Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref><lb />
  contest in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Shrines</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sia</hi>, Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sierra Madre</hi>, Apache captured in, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Silver</hi> ornaments used in marriage settlement, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Silver-work</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>-77, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sí̆snají̆nĭ</hi>, a Navaho sacred mountain, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Skin</hi>, painted, of Apache, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>-35<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Antelope skin</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Buffalo skin</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Deerskin</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Skirts</hi>, sacred, used in childbirth, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Clothing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Skunk</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sky</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref><lb />
  creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sky God</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sky Messengers</hi> of Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Slaves</hi> made of captives by Navaho, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Small Dipper</hi>, creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Smoking.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pipes</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tobacco</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Snake Girl.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Klí̆shcho Nalí̆n</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Snake, Great</hi>, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref><lb />
  represented in Jicarilla dry-painting, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Snake People</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Snipe Man</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Social customs</hi> of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marriage</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mortuary customs</hi>;  <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Puberty</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Women</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Songs</hi> addressed to God of Health, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  employed in maturity rite, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  in Apache ceremony, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref>-42<lb />
  in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref><lb />
  in Navaho ceremonies, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg086">86</ref>, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref>, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref><lb />
  of Apache medicine-men, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref><lb />
  of gods in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sonora</hi>, Apache raids into, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref><lb />
  scalp bounty offered by, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sorcery</hi>, penalty for, among Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Witchcraft</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Souls</hi>, belief in, by Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Spanish</hi> missionaries and the Apache, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref><lb />
  origin of Navaho metal-work, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sparrow-hawk People</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Spider</hi> in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Spider Woman</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Spirit Dance</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Spirits</hi>, Navaho dread of, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref><lb />
  of the dead of the Apache, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Spruce</hi> used in Jicarilla ceremony, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>-60<lb />
  used in Navaho Night Chant, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>-120</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Squashes</hi> represented in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Squirrel.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pine squirrel</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Stars</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>-93</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Stĕnátlĭhă<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi>, an Apache goddess, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>-33, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  represented in Apache painting, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  symbolized on maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Storage baskets</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Suicide</hi> among Apache, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref></p>

<pb n="159" /><anchor id="Pg159" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sumac</hi>, berries used by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref><lb />
  used in making water bottles, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sun</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref><lb />
  creation of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref><lb />
  the father of Twin Gods, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See also</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sun God</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sunbeams</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sun-dogs</hi> in Navaho dry-painting, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sunflower</hi>, stalks of, used for flutes, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sun God</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>-106<lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chĕhonaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chuganaái</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Chunnaái</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sŭsh Nalkái</hi>, a Navaho mythic bear, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sweat</hi>, mythic creation from, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sweat-bath</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  in Night Chant ceremony, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Sweat-house</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>-27<lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Symbol</hi> of faith among Apache, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Symbolism</hi>, ancient, discarded by Apache, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref><lb />
  color, of the Apache, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref><lb />
  color, of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref>, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref><lb />
  color, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>-92, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  on Apache caps, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  on Apache maternity belt, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>-39<lb />
  on Apache medicine skin, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref>-36</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Taboo</hi> of bear and fish, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  of conversation while masked, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref><lb />
  of flesh in puberty ceremony, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  of houses of the dead, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref><lb />
  of mother-in-law among Navaho, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref><lb />
  of names of the dead, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref><lb />
  of salt in puberty ceremony, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  of scratching in puberty ceremony, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  of <hi rend="font-style: italic">tsí̆ndi hogán</hi> by Navaho, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tádtĭtĭn</hi>, Navaho name for pollen, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hádĭntĭn</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pollen</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Talking God.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hasché̆ltĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Taos</hi>, Jicarilla contact with, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref><lb />
  mentioned in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tarantula</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tattooing</hi> among Apache, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tázhí̆.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Turkey</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Temperature</hi> of White Mountain reservation, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Texas</hi>, Apache raids into, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tipis</hi> of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tizwin.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Túlapai</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">To Ahánĭ clan</hi>, origin of, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tobacco</hi> depicted in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>-109, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi>, a Navaho deity, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  birth and adventures of, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>-106<lb />
  personated in Night Chant, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See also</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Kobadjischínĭ</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">To Dĭchínĭ clan</hi>, origin of, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Toi Hatál</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Water Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tónenĭlĭ</hi>, Navaho Rain God, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  personated in begging ceremony, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tontos</hi>, Apache name for, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  assigned to reservation, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref><lb />
  population of, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  subdued by Crook, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tracking Bear</hi>, a Navaho monster, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Trade</hi> of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Travelling</hi>, Apache method of, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Treaties</hi> with the Navaho, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>-83</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tree, Little</hi>, in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Trees</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref><lb />
  terms for, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>natí̆</hi>, Jicarilla clowns, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsé̆gyiĭ</hi>, a Navaho locality, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Cañon de Chelly</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsé̆nagai.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rolling Stone</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsĕ Nahálĭ</hi>, preying Mountain Eagle, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsĕtahí̆dzĭlhtúhlĭ</hi>, a Navaho monster, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsilité̆n.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Coyote</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsí̆ndi</hi>, meaning of, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsí̆ndi hogán</hi> defined, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref><lb />
  taboo of, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hogán</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tsótzĭlh</hi>, a Navaho sacred mountain, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tubadzĭscí̆nĭ</hi>, an Apache deity, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  function of, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  represented in Apache painting, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref><lb />
  symbolized on maternity belt, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See also</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Kobadjischínĭ</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Túlapai</hi> drunk by the Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>-20</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tule</hi>, pollen of, used by Apache, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tu Ntĕlh</hi>, an Apache god, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Turkey</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref><lb />
  prayer-sticks with feathers of, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Turquoise</hi>, bowl of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  clothing of, in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref><lb />
  in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref><lb />
  in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref></p>

<pb n="160" /><anchor id="Pg160" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Turquoise</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>-107, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref><lb />
  jewelry of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref><lb />
  lance of Apache War God, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  man born of, in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref><lb />
  pipe in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Turquoise Boy</hi> of Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Turquoise Woman</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dutlí̆shí Nalí̆n</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Turtle monster</hi> in Jicarilla myth, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref>-65</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tus.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Water bottle</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Twin Gods</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Nayé̆nĕzoanĭ</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tzĕs.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Elk</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tzĭlhkí̆chĭ Hatál.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mountain Chant</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Tzĭlhnúhodĭhlĭ</hi>, sacred mountain, created, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Underworld</hi>, Navaho origin in, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Genesis</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ute</hi>, Jicarillas influenced by, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Valleys</hi>, creation of, in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Vegetation</hi> of White Mountain reservation, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Trees</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Victorio</hi>, conference with, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref><lb />
  surrender and death of, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Visions</hi>, God of, in Apache cosmology, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref><lb />
  knowledge gained through, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref><lb />
  medicine-men influenced by, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Vocabulary</hi>, Southern Athapascan, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>-144</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Walapai</hi> join in Apache hostilities, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref><lb />
  tribal name of, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Walnuts</hi> eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">War</hi> ceremonies, God Dance a part of, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref><lb />
  of extermination against Apache, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">War Gods</hi>, Navaho. <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Nayé̆né̆zganĭ</hi>;  <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Tobadzĭschí̆nĭ</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Washing</hi> of hands in marriage ceremony, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bathing</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Hair-washing</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Water</hi>, miraculous creation of, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref><lb />
  relation of Tubadzĭschí̆nĭ with, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref><lb />
  Yólkai Ĕstsán conceives from, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yólkai Ĕstsán</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Water bottle</hi> in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>-28, <ref target="Pg031">30</ref><lb />
  in marriage ceremony, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref><lb />
  in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref><lb />
  of the Apache, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref><lb />
  of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref><lb />
  sacred symbol prescribed for, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Water Chant</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Water God</hi> of the Apache, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Rain God</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Water Monsters</hi> in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Water Sprinkler</hi>, a Navaho Rain God, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Weapons</hi>, Jicarilla, origin of, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Weasel</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Weaving.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Blankets</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Wheels</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref><lb />
  medicine, made by Apache, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Whips</hi>, yucca, of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>-121</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Whirling log</hi> represented in dry-painting, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>-121</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Whirlwind</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Whirlwind God</hi> of the Jicarillas, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Winds</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White Corn Boy</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White Mountain Apache</hi>, population of, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White Mountain reservation</hi>, Apache placed on, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref><lb />
  character and area of, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref><lb />
  "medicine" craze on, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref><lb />
  property disputes on, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White objects</hi> created by Yólkai Skhĭn, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref><lb />
  symbolic of prayer, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White river</hi>, Arizona, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White-Shell Boy</hi> of Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White-Shell Girl.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yólkai Nalí̆n</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White-Shell Man</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">White-Shell Woman.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yólkai Ĕstsán</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Wildcats</hi> in Jicarilla mythology, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Wind People</hi> of Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Winds</hi>, function of, in Navaho belief, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref><lb />
  how regarded by Apache, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  in Apache myth, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref><lb />
  in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>, <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  participation of, in Jicarilla creation, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref><lb />
  pollen scattered to, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Witchcraft</hi>, penalty for, in future world, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sorcery</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Wolf</hi> in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Wolf People</hi> of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Women</hi>, Apache, descent traced through, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref><lb />
  Apache, dress of, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  Apache, houses built by, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref><lb />
  Apache, modesty of, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref></p>

<pb n="161" /><anchor id="Pg161" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Women</hi>, Apache, property right of, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref><lb />
  Apache, status of, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>-14<lb />
  chiefs in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref><lb />
  how treated, in Jicarilla ceremony, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla, dress of, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla, hair-dressing of, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Jicarilla, modesty of, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref><lb />
  Navaho, blanket weavers, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref><lb />
  Navaho, clothing of, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  Navaho, hair-dressing of, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref><lb />
  Navaho, status of, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref><lb />
  Navaho, work of, <ref target="Pg085">85</ref><lb />
  separated from men in Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg085">85</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Childbirth</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marriage</hi>; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Puberty ceremony</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Wool</hi> blankets, in Navaho myth of, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Wósakĭdĭ.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Grasshopper People</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yádĭlhkĭh Bĭnálzé̆</hi>, Sky Messengers, of  Apache myth, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yádĭlhkĭh Skhĭn.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sky God</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yakósha Skhĭn</hi>, an Apache deity, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Apache-Mohave</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yavapai</hi>, application of name, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yébĭchai</hi> and Apache dance compared, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref><lb />
  dance of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  gods of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref><lb />
  order, initiation into, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref><lb />
  signification of, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yéĭtso</hi>, Big God of the Navaho, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yellow-Corn Girl</hi> of Navaho myth, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yíyĕ.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Owl</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yoi Hatál.</hi> See Bead Chant</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yólkai Ĕstsán</hi>, a Jicarilla goddess, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg064">64</ref>,  <ref target="Pg068">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  a Navaho goddess, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>-96, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>,  <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yólkai Nalí̆n</hi>, an Apache goddess, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref><lb />
  function of, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref><lb />
  guardian of spirit-land, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  how supplicated, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yólkai Skhĭn</hi>, White-Shell Boy, of Apache,  <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yŭádiĭstan</hi>, an Apache god, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yucca</hi> fruit eaten by Apache, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref><lb />
  root in Navaho mythology, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref><lb />
  root, washing with, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref><lb />
  used for head-band, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref><lb />
  whips made of, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>-121</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yuma</hi>, Jicarilla name for, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Yuman</hi> and Apache relations, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref><lb />
  and Jicarilla ceremony compared, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Zahadolzhá</hi>, Fringe-mouth gods of Navaho, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Zuñi</hi>, Apache name for the, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref><lb />
  Navaho name for, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref><lb />
  people among Navaho, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref></p>
</div>

<div>
<p>THE END OF VOLUME I</p>

<p>The University Press, Cambridge, U.S.A.</p>
</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
<div>
<pgIf output="pdf">
  <then>
      <div>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </then>
  <else>
      <div>
        <head>Footnotes</head>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </else>
</pgIf>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>

</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>

